


General introduction page viii 
Chronological table of Descartes’ life and works xi 


Early Writings 
Translator’s preface I 
Early Writings 


Rules for the Direction of the Mind 


Translator’s preface 7 
Rules for the Direction of the Mind 9 
Rule One 9 
Rule Two 10 
Rule Three 13 
Rule Four 15 
Rule Five 20 
Rule Six 21 
Rule Seven | 25 
Rule Eight 28 
Rule Nine 33 
Rule Ten 34 
Rule Eleven 37 
Rule Twelve 39 
Rule Thirteen 51 
Rule Fourteen 56 
Rule Fifteen 65 
Rule Sixteen 66 
Rule Seventeen 70 
Rule Eighteen 71 
Rule Nineteen 76 
Rule Twenty 76 
Rule Twenty-one 76 
Appendix 77 


vi Contents 


The World and Treatise on Man 
Translator’s preface 
The World or Treatise on Light 
Treatise on Man 


Discourse and Essays 
Translator’s preface 
Discourse on the Method 

Part One 
Part Two 

Part Three 
Part Four 
Part Five 
Part Six 
Optics 


Principles of Philosophy 

Translator’s preface 
Preface to French Edition 
Dedicatory Letter to Elizabeth 

Principles of Philosophy 
Part One: The Principles of Human Knowledge 
Part Two: The Principles of Material Things 
Part Three: The Visible Universe 
Part Four: The Earth 


Comments on a Certain Broadsheet 
Translator’s preface 
Comments on a Certain Broadsheet 


Description of the Human Body 
Translator’s preface 
Description of the Human Body and of all its Functions 


The Passions of the Soul 


Translator’s preface 
Prefatory letters 
The Passions of the Soul 
Part One: The Passions in General 


79 
81 


99 


109 
III 
I1l 
116 
122 
126 
131 
141 
152 


177 
179 
190 
193 
193 
223 
248 
267 


293 
294 


313 
314 


325 
326 
328 
328 


Contents Vil 


Part Two: The Number and Order of the Passions 349 
Part Three: Specific Passions 383 


Index 405 


General Introduction 


The aim of this two-volume edition is to provide a completely new 
translation of the philosophical writings of Descartes, based on the 
original Latin and French texts. Although many of Descartes’ philo- 
sophical works are now available in English either individually or in 
various selections, the only tolerably comprehensive edition remains that 
of Haldane and Ross, which first appeared in 1911.! But although it has 
come to be regarded as the standard English edition, HR omits many 
works which are crucial for a full understanding of Descartes’ philo- 
sophy. The present work, by contrast, aims to be as comprehensive as 
possible. Considerations of space have prevented us from being as 
inclusive as some, no doubt, would have wished; we have not, for 
example, included any of Descartes’ letters, partly because an excellent 
selection is already available in English.* But as well as including all the 
works to be found in Haldane and Ross, viz. the Discourse on the 
Method, Meditations, Objections and Replies, Rules for the Direction of 
the Mind, The Search for Truth, Comments on a Certain Broadsheet, 
The Passions of the Soul and selections from the Principles of Philo- 
sophy, we have also provided extracts from Descartes’ Early Writings, 
from The World, Treatise on Man, Optics and Description of the 
Human Body; our selection from the Principles, moreover, includes 
many articles not translated in Haldane and Ross. In general, we have 
construed the term ‘philosophical’ in a fairly generous way, so as to 
include, as well as Descartes’ more celebrated metaphysical and episte- 
mological works, a fair selection of his scientific writings (on physiology, 
psychology, physics and cosmology), which are likely to be of interest to 
students of philosophy and allied disciplines. 

Descartes wrote with equal fluency in Latin and French, and published 
in both languages; within his lifetime some of his Latin works were 


1 The Philosophical Works of Descartes, tr. Elisabeth S$. Haldane and G. R. T. Ross 
(Cambridge: CUP, 1911, repr. 1931). 

2 Descartes, Philosophical Letters, tr. A. Kenny (Oxford: OUP, 1970: repr. Oxford: 
Blackwell, 1980). 


Vill 


General Introduction ix 


subsequently translated into French, and some of his French works into 
Latin. Our own translations of Descartes’ works are made, in each case, 
from the original language in which they were composed (for further 
details see translators’ prefaces to the individual works). Where subse- 
quent translations approved by Descartes provide important additional 
material, this has also been translated, but in footnotes or within 
diamond brackets <...>, to distinguish it from the original material. 
We have thus firmly rejected the practice of Haldane and Ross, whose 
translation, e.g. in the case of the Meditations and Principles, is based on 
an uneasy amalgam of the original Latin and later French editions, with 
the result that the reader is frequently left in the dark as to whether a 
given rendering corresponds to Descartes’ original words or to the 
formulation of one of his contemporary translators. 

We have endeavoured to make our translations as accurate as possible, 
while at the same time attempting to produce readable modern English. 
Where Descartes employs technical terms which are now obsolete (e.g. 
‘objective reality’) or uses expressions which are liable to cause difficulty 
to the modern student, we have supplied explanatory footnotes. But 
apart from this, we have tried to make the translations stand on their 
own feet. Often we have found that the choice of a particular English 
word or phrase hinges on a complex chain of philosophical argument 
which it it is impossible to summarize adequately in a brief footnote; to 
do justice to the issues involved would have required a formidable 
exegetical apparatus which would greatly have reduced the space avail- 
able for presenting Descartes’ own writings. We have also rejected the 
device, used sporadically by Haldane and Ross and others, of inserting 
unexplained original Latin or French phrases when the translation is 
difficult or problematical; such a proceeding merely tends to puzzle the 
reader having no French or Latin, and is of doubtful value to those who 
are able to consult the original texts for themselves. In cases where we 
have found it necessary to refer to Latin or French terms in our footnotes, 
we have always explained their meaning. 

In dividing the material between the two volumes, we have decided to 
place the Meditations and the Objections and Replies together, since they 
are interconnected in the closest possible way, and were originally 
published by Descartes as a single book. These works comprise the bulk 
of Volume Two; also included is The Search for Truth, whose exact 
date is uncertain but which was probably composed in the same period as 
the Meditations, and deals with many of the same themes. Volume One 
contains all the remaining works, arranged in chronological order. Each 
work is preceded by an introductory note giving details of its composi- 
tion and original publication. Comprehensive philosophical indexes are 


x General Introduction 


included at the end of each volume, and each volume also contains a brief 
chronological table of Descartes’ life and works. 

Our translations are based on the texts to be found in the standard 
twelve-volume edition of Descartes’ works by Adam and Tannery 
(known as AT).! We have, however, consulted many other editions, and 
where these have been of particular value they are mentioned in the 
prefaces to individual works. Important departures from the text in AT 
are recorded in footnotes. Where the text is abridged, omitted material is 
indicated by dots, thus ..., and further information is supplied in a 
footnote. For each work we have supplied, in the margins, running 
cross-references to the page number of the relevant volume of AT. It 
should be noted that, unless otherwise indicated, all comments in 
footnotes are those of the translators, not of Descartes. 

The work of translation has been divided as follows: John Cottingham 
has translated the Meditations, Objections and Replies, Early Writings, 
Principles of Philosophy and Description of the Human Body; Robert 
Stoothoff has translated The World, Treatise on Man, Discourse on the 
Method, Optics, The Passions of the Soul and the first half of The Search 
for Truth; and Dugald Murdoch has translated the Rules for the 
Direction of the Mind, Comments on a Certain Broadsheet and the 
second half of The Search for Truth. All the members of the team have, 
however, scrutinized each other’s work, and made numerous sugges- 
tions, many of which have found their way into the final versions. 

We are happy to acknowledge our debt to the many previous 
translators, editors and writers — too numerous to list here: — who have 
contributed to our understanding of Descartes’ works. In a project of this 
size it is no empty formality to acknowledge our own responsibility for 
the shortcomings that undoubtedly remain; we can only enter as our plea 
the words with which Descartes himself concluded the Meditations — 
naturae nostrae infirmitas est agnoscenda. 


John Cottingham 
University of Reading, England 


Robert Stoothoff 
Dugald Murdoch 
University of Canterbury, New Zealand. 


1 Oeuvres de Descartes, edited by Ch. Adam and P. Tannery (revised edition, Paris: 
Vrin/C.N.R.S., 1964-76). 


Chronological table of Descartes’ life and works 


1596 
1606-14 
1616 
1618 
1619 


1622 


1628 


1629 
1633 


1635 
1637 
1641 
1642 


1643 


1644 


born at La Haye near Tours on 31 March 

attends Jesuit college of La Fléche at Anjou! 

takes Baccalauréat and Licence in law at University of Poitiers 
goes to Holland; joins army of Prince Maurice of Nassau; 
meets Isaac Beeckman; composes a short treatise on music, 
the Compendium Musicae 

travels in Germany; 10 November: has vision of new mathe- 
matical and scientific system 

returns to France; during next few years spends time in Paris, 
but also travels in Europe 

composes Rules for the Direction of the Mind; leaves for 
Holland, which is to be his home until 1649, though with 
frequent changes of address 

begins working on The World 

condemnation of Galileo; abandons plans to publish The 
World 

birth of Descartes’ natural daughter Francine, baptized 
7 August (died 1640) 

publishes Discourse on the Method, with Optics, Meteorolo- 
gy and Geometry 

Meditations on First Philosophy published, together with 
Objections and Replies (first six sets) 

second edition of Meditations published, with all seven sets 
of Objections and Replies and Letter to Dinet 

Cartesian philosophy condemned at the University of Utrecht; 
Descartes’ long correspondence with Princess Elizabeth of 
Bohemia begins 

visits France; Principles of Philosophy published 


1 Descartes is known to have stayed at La Fléche for eight or nine years, but the exact dates 
of his arrival and departure are uncertain. Baillet places Descartes’ admission in 1604, 
the year of the College’s foundation (A. Baillet, La vie de M. Des-Cartes (1691), vol. 1, 


p. 18). 


x1 


Xi 
1647 


1648 


1649 


1650 


Chronological Table 


awarded a pension by King of France; publishes Comments 
on a Certain Broadsheet; begins work on Description of the 
Human Body 

interviewed by Frans Burman at Egmond-Binnen (Conversa- 
tion with Burman) 

goes to Sweden on invitation of Queen Christina; The 
Passions of the Soul published 

dies at Stockholm on 11 February 


Early Writings 


Translator’s preface 


An inventory of Descartes’ papers made at Stockholm after his death 
mentions a small notebook containing various early writings, apparently 
composed during Descartes’ travels in Europe during the years 1619-22. 
The notebook is now lost, but a copy taken by Leibniz was later 
discovered and published under the title Cogitationes Privatae (‘Private 
thoughts’) in 1859. This Latin text, as published with minor corrections 
in Volume x of Adam and Tannery,' is the source of the extracts 
translated below. 

According to Descartes’ biographer Adrien Baillet (1649-1706), the 
original notebook (which he inspected) was divided into various sections 
under different headings. These included Praeambula (‘Preliminaries’) 
with the motto ‘The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom’; 
Experimenta (‘Observations’); and Olympica (‘Olympian matters’). The 
probable positionings of these headings are indicated below, though the 
correct grouping and ordering of the extracts is a matter of conjecture, 
since no divisions or headings were provided in Leibniz’ copy. A detailed 
study of the Early Writings may be found in Henri Gouhier, Les 
Premiéres Pensées de Descartes (Paris: Vrin, 1958). 

LC: 


1 See General Introduction, above p. x. 


AT X 


213 


214 


EARLY WRITINGS 


Preliminaries 


Actors, taught not to let any embarrassment show on their faces, put on a 
mask. I will do the same. So far, I have been a spectator in this theatre 
which is the world, but I am now about to mount the stage, and I come 
forward masked. 


In my youth, when I was shown an ingenious invention, I used to 
wonder whether I could work it out for myself before reading the 
inventor’s account. This practice gradually led me to realize that I was 
making use of definite rules. 


Science is like a woman: if she stays faithful to her husband she is 
respected; if she becomes common property she grows to be despised. 


In the case of most books, once we have read a few lines and looked at 
a few of the diagrams, the entire message is perfectly obvious. The rest is 
added only to fill up the paper. 


The mathematical treasure trove of Polybius, citizen of the world.! 
This work lays down the true means of solving all the difficulties in the 
science of mathematics, and demonstrates that the human intellect can 
achieve nothing further on these questions. The work is aimed at certain 
people who promise to show us miraculous discoveries in all the sciences, 
its purpose being to chide them for their sluggishness and to expose the 
emptiness of their boasts. A further aim is to lighten the agonizing toil of 
those who struggle night and day with the Gordian knots of this science, 
and who squander their intellectual resources to no avail. The work is 
offered afresh to learned men throughout the world and especially to the 
distinguished brothers of the Rose Croix in Germany.’ 


1 Evidently a pseudonym which Descartes contemplated using. 
2 ‘Afresh’: what Descartes means here is not known. The reference to the Rosicrucians 
may well be ironical. 


Early Writings 3 


The sciences are at present masked, but if the masks were taken off, 
they would be revealed in all their beauty. If we could see how the 
sciences are linked together, we would find them no harder to retain in 
our minds than the series of numbers. 


For each of us there is a set limit to our intellectual powers which we 
cannot pass. Those who, through lack of intelligence, cannot make 
discoveries by employing first principles, will still be able to recognize the 
true worth of the sciences, and this will enable them to arrive at a correct 
judgement of the value of things. 


Observations 


I use the term ‘vices’ to refer to the diseases of the mind, which are not so 
easy to recognize as diseases of the body. This is because we have 
frequently experienced sound bodily health, but have never known true 


health of the mind. 


I notice that if I am sad or in danger and preoccupied by some serious 
undertaking, I sleep deeply and eat voraciously. But if I am full of joy, I 
do not eat or sleep. 


In a garden we can produce shadows to represent certain shapes, such 
as trees; or we can trim a hedge so that from a certain perspective it 
represents a given shape. Again, in a room we can arrange for the rays of 
the sun to pass through various openings so as to represent different 
numbers or figures; or we can make it seem as if there are tongues of 
flame, or chariots of fire, or other shapes in the air. This is all done by 
mirrors which focus the sun’s rays at various points. Again, we can 
arrange things so that when the sun is shining into a room, it always 
seems to come from the same direction, or seems to go from west to east. 
This is all done by parabolic reflectors: the sun’s rays must fall on a 
concave mirror on the roof, and the mirror’s focal point must be in line 
with a small hole, on the other side of which is another concave mirror 
with the same focal distance, which is also aligned on the hole. This 
causes the sun’s rays to be cast in parallel lines inside the room.' 


In the year 1620, I began to understand the fundamental principles of a 
wonderful discovery. 


1 The original of this piece is in French and not, as is the case with all the other extracts, in 
Latin. 


215 


216 


217 


4 Early Writings 


In November 1619, I had a dream involving the Seventh Ode of 
Ausonius, which begins Quod vitae sectabor iter [‘What road in life shall I 
follow?’].! 


It is just as valuable to be censured by friends as it is splendid to be 
praised by enemies. We desire praise from those who do not know us, but 
from friends we want the truth. 


In the minds of all of us there are certain elements which once aroused, 
however slightly, produce strong emotions. Thus, if a high-spirited child 
is scolded, he will not weep but get angry, whereas another child will 
weep. If we are told that some disaster has occurred we are sad; but if we 
are afterwards told that some wicked man was responsible, we become 
angry. In moving from one passion to another, we pass through 
intermediate related passions. But often there will be a more violent 
transition from one passion to its opposite, as when in the course of a 
lively banquet we suddenly hear news of some misfortune. 


Olympian matters? 


Just as the imagination employs figures in order to conceive of bodies, so, 
in order to frame ideas of spiritual things, the intellect makes use of 
certain bodies which are perceived through the senses, such as wind and 
light. By this means we may philosophize in a more exalted way, and 
develop the knowledge to raise our minds to lofty heights. 

It may seem surprising to find weighty judgements in the writings of 
the poets rather than the philosophers. The reason is that the poets were 
driven to write by enthusiasm and the force of imagination. We have 
within us the sparks of knowledge, as in a flint: philosophers extract 
them through reason, but poets force them out through the sharp blows 
of the imagination, so that they shine more brightly. 


1 The dream occurred in Descartes’ famous ‘stove-heated room’ in southern Germany 
(probably Ulm). According to Baillet, Descartes went to bed on 10 November 1619 ‘full 
of enthusiasm, convinced he had discovered the foundations of a marvellous science’. He 
then had three consecutive dreams. In the first he was assailed by phantoms and a 
whirlwind, and felt a pain in his side which he feared had been produced by some evil 
demon. In the second he heard a terrible noise like a thunderclap. In the third he opened a 
volume of poetry and found the verse quoted here (by Decius Magnus Ausonius, a 
Roman poet of the fourth century A.D., who lived in Bordeaux). On waking, Descartes 
interpreted his dreams as evidence of his destiny to produce a new mathematical and 
scientific system, and made a vow to the Virgin to visit her shrine at Loretto. Full details 
of the episode are given in Adrien Baillet’s Life of Descartes (La Vie de M. Des-Cartes, 
1691), vol. 1, pp. 80—6 (quoted in AT x 18off). 

2 According to Baillet, a description by Descartes of his discovery in 1619 of the 
‘foundations of a wonderful science’ originally belonged in this section of the notebook. 


Early Writings 5 


The pronouncements of the learned can be reduced to a very small 
number of general rules. 


Before the end of November | shall head for Loretto. I intend to go 218 
there on foot from Venice, if this is feasible and is the custom. If not, I 
will make the pilgrimage with all the devotion that anyone could 
normally be expected to show. 

At all events I will complete my treatise before Easter, and if I can find 
publishers, and I am satisfied with what I manage to produce, I shall 
publish it. This is the promise I have made today, 23 February 1620. 


There is a single active power in things: love, charity, harmony. 


The things which are perceivable by the senses are helpful in enabling 
us to conceive of Olympian matters. The wind signifies spirit; movement 
with the passage of time signifies life; light signifies knowledge; heat 
signifies love; and instantaneous activity signifies creation. Every cor- 
poreal form acts through harmony. There are more wet things than dry 
things, and more cold things than hot, because if this were not so, the 
active elements would have won the battle too quickly and the world 
would not have lasted long. 


‘God separated the light from the darkness.’ This text in Genesis means 
that God separated the good angels from the bad angels. The text cannot 
be understood literally, since a privation cannot be separated from a 
positive state. God is pure intelligence. 


The Lord has made three marvels: something out of nothing; free will; 
and God in Man. 


Man has knowledge of natural things only through their resemblance 
to the things which come under the senses. Indeed, our estimate of how 
much truth a person has achieved in his philosophizing! will increase the 219 
more he has been able to propose some similarity between what he is 
investigating and the things known by the senses. 


The high degree of perfection displayed in some of their actions makes 
us suspect that animals do not have free will.” 


1 Here, as often in Descartes, the terms ‘philosophy’, ‘philosophize’ etc. include what 
would nowadays be called scientific reasoning. 
2 See below, Discourse, part 5, p. 139 and Principles, part 1, art. 37, p. 205. 


Rules for the Direction of the Mind 


Translator’s preface 


Descartes’ Rules for the Direction of the Mind (Regulae ad Directionem 
Ingenti) was written in Latin, probably in 1628 or a few years earlier, but 
was not published during the author’s lifetime. A Dutch translation of 
the work appeared in Holland in 1684, and the first Latin edition was 
published in Amsterdam by P. and J. Blaeu in 1701.! 

In the inventory of Descartes’ papers made at Stockholm shortly after 
his death in 1650 the work is listed as ‘Nine notebooks bound together, 
containing part of a Treatise on clear and useful Rules for the Direction 
of the Mind in the Search for Truth’. The original manuscript, which is 
lost, passed to Claude Clerselier, one of Descartes’ staunchest supporters, 
who showed the work to several scholars, including Antoine Arnauld. 
The manuscript was seen also by Adrien Baillet, Descartes’ biographer, 
who gave a summary of its contents in his La Vie de Monsieur 
Des-Cartes (1691). Leibniz bought a copy of the original manuscript in 
Amsterdam in 1670, and this copy has survived among the Leibniz 
papers in the Royal Public Library at Hanover. 

The Rules was originally intended to contain three parts, each 
comprising twelve rules. The second set of twelve rules is incomplete, 
ending at Rule Twenty-one, and only the headings of Rules Nineteen to 
Twenty-one are given. The final set of twelve Rules is entirely missing; it 
appears that Descartes left this project unfinished. The first twelve Rules 
are concerned with simple propositions and the two cognitive operations 
by means of which they are known, intuition and deduction. The second 
set deal with what Descartes calls ‘perfectly understood problems’, i.e. 
problems in which.the object of inquiry is a unique function of the data 
and which can be expressed in the forms of equations. Problems of this 
sort are confined largely to the sphere of mathematics. The projected 
third set of Rules would have dealt with ‘imperfectly understood 
problems’, i.e. problems which, owing to the multiplicity of the data 
involved, resist expression in the form of an equation; problems of this 
sort are prominent in the empirical sciences. Descartes had intended to 


1 R. Des-Cartes Opuscula posthuma, physica et mathematica. 


7 


8 Rules for the Direction of the Mind 


show how imperfectly understood problems can be reduced to perfectly 
understood ones. 

The present translation is based primarily on the text in Volume x of 
Adam and Tannery.! There are differences of detail between the Amster- 
dam edition of 1701 and the Hanover manuscript; they were probably 
based on different copies of the original manuscript. Where the two texts 
differ, the 1701 edition in most cases provides the better reading, and 
Adam and Tannery generally follow this text. In several instances, 
however, readings other than those adopted by Adam and Tannery have 
been preferred in the present translation; these are described in footnotes 
when the variants are not given in Adam and Tannery, or when neither of 
the alternative variants yields an obviously preferable reading. The 
critical edition of Giovanni Crapulli! has been a useful supplement to 
Adam and Tannery, and several of Crapulli’s readings have been 
adopted. 

In the footnotes the Amsterdam edition of 1701 is referred to as A, and 


the Hanover manuscript as H. 
D.M. 


1 See General Introduction, p. x above. 

2 René Descartes: Regulae ad directionem ingenii: texte critique établi par Giovanni 
Crapulli avec la version hollandaise du XVIléme siécle (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 
1966). 


RULES FOR THE DIRECTION OF THE MIND 


Rule One 


The aim of our studies should be to direct the mind with a view to 
forming true and sound judgements about whatever comes before it. 


Whenever people notice some similarity between two things, they are in 
the habit of ascribing to the one what they find true of the other, even 
when the two are not in that respect similar. Thus they wrongly compare 
the sciences, which consist wholly in knowledge acquired by the mind, 
with the arts, which require some bodily aptitude and practice. They 
recognize that one man cannot master all the arts at once and that it is 
easier to excel as a craftsman if one practises only one skill; for one man 
cannot turn his hand to both farming and harp-playing, or to several 
different tasks of this kind, as easily as he can to just one of them. This 
has made people come to think that the same must be true of the sciences 
as well. Distinguishing the sciences by the differences in their objects, 
they think that each science should be studied separately, without regard 
to any of the others. But here they are surely mistaken. For the sciences as 
a whole are nothing other than human wisdom, which always remains 
one and the same, however different the subjects to which it is applied, it 
being no more altered by them than sunlight is by the variety of the things 
it shines on. Hence there is no need to impose any restrictions on our 
mental powers; for‘the knowledge of one truth does not, like skill in one 
art, hinder us from discovering another; on the contrary it helps us. 
Indeed, it seems strange to me that so many people should investigate 
with such diligence the virtues of plants,’ the motions of the stars, the 
transmutations of metals, and the objects of similar disciplines, while 
hardly anyone gives a thought to good sense — to universal wisdom. For 
every other science is to be valued not so much for its own sake as for its 
contribution to universal wisdom. Hence, we have reason to propose this 
as our very first rule, since what makes us stray from the correct way of 
seeking the truth is chiefly our ignoring the general end of universal 


1 The translation here follows the texts of A and H: AT, following an emendation by 
Leibniz, read ‘the customs of men, the virtues of plants...’ 


9 


AT X 
359 


360 


361 


362 


10 Rules for the Direction of the Mind 


wisdom and directing our studies towards some particular ends. I do not 
mean vile and despicable ends such as empty glory or base gain: specious 
arguments and tricks suited to vulgar minds clearly provide a much more 
direct route to these ends than a sound knowledge of the truth could 
provide. I have in mind, rather, respectable and commendable ends, for 
these are often more subtly misleading — ends such as the pursuit of 
sciences conducive to the comforts of life or to the pleasure to be gained 
from contemplating the truth, which is practically the only happiness in 
this life that is complete and untroubled by any pain. We can indeed look 
forward to these legitimate fruits of the sciences; but if we think of them 
during our studies, they frequently cause us to overlook many items 
which are required for a knowledge of other things, because at first 
glance they seem of little use or of little interest. It must be acknowledged 
that all the sciences are so closely interconnected that it is much easier to 
learn them all together than to separate one from the other. If, therefore, 
someone seriously wishes to investigate the truth of things, he ought not 
to select one science in particular, for they are all interconnected and 
interdependent. He should, rather, consider simply how to increase the 
natural light of his reason, not with a view to solving this or that 
scholastic problem, but in order that his intellect should show his will 
what decision it ought to make in each of life’s contingencies. He will 
soon be surprised to find that he has made far greater progress than those 
who devote themselves to particular studies, and that he has achieved not 
only everything that the specialists aim at but also goals far beyond any 
they can hope to reach. 


Rule Two 


We should attend only to those objects of which our minds seem capable 
of having certain and indubitable cognition. 


All knowledge! is certain and evident cognition. Someone who has 
doubts about many things is no wiser than one who has never given them 
a thought; indeed, he appears less wise if he has formed a false opinion 
about any of them. Hence it is better never to study at all than to occupy 
ourselves with objects which are so difficult that we are unable to 
distinguish what is true from what is false, and are forced to take the 
doubtful as certain; for in such matters the risk of diminishing our 
knowledge is greater than our hope of increasing it. So, in accordance 
with this Rule, we reject all such merely probable cognition and resolve 
to believe only what is perfectly known and incapable of being doubted. 
Men of learning are perhaps convinced that there is very little indubitable 


1 Lat. scientia, Descartes’ term for systematic knowledge based on indubitable founda- 
tions. 


Rule Two 11 


knowledge, since, owing to a common human failing, they have dis- 
dained to reflect upon such indubitable truths, taking them to be too easy 
and obvious to everyone. But there are, | insist, a lot more of these truths 
than such people think — truths which suffice for the sure demonstration 
of countless propositions which so far they have managed to treat as no 
more than probable. Because they have thought it unbecoming for a man 
of learning to admit to being ignorant on any matter, they have got so 
used to elaborating their contrived doctrines that they have gradually 
come to believe them and to pass them off as true. 

Nevertheless, if we adhere strictly to this Rule, there will be very few 
things which we can get down to studying. For there is hardly any 
question in the sciences about which clever men have not frequently 
disagreed. But whenever two persons make opposite judgements about 
the same thing, it is certain that at least one of them is mistaken, 
and neither, it seems, has knowledge. For if the reasoning of one of 
them were certain and evident, he would be able to lay it before the other 
in such a way as eventually to convince his intellect as well. Therefore, 
concerning all such matters of probable opinion we can, | think, acquire 
no perfect knowledge, for it would be presumptuous to hope that we 
could gain more knowledge than others have managed to achieve. 
Accordingly, if my reckoning is correct, out of all the sciences so far 
devised, we are restricted to just arithmetic and geometry if we stick to 
this Rule. 

Yet I do not wish on that account to condemn that method of 
philosophizing which others have hitherto devised, nor those weapons of 
the schoolmen, probable syllogisms,! which are just made for con- 
troversies. For these exercise the minds of the young, stimulating them 
with a certain rivalry; and it is much better that their minds should be 
informed with opinions of that sort — even though they are evidently 
uncertain, being controversial among the learned — than that they should 
be left entirely to their own devices. Perhaps without guidance they might 
head towards a precipice, but so long as they follow in their masters’ 
footsteps (though straying at times from the truth), they will surely hold 
to a course that is more secure, at least in the sense that it has already 
been tested by wiser heads. For our part, we are very glad that we had a 
scholastic education of this sort. But we are now freed from the oath 
which bound us to our master’s words and are old enough to be no 
longer subject to the rod. So if we seriously wish to propose rules for 
ourselves which will help us scale the heights of human knowledge, we 
must include, as one of our primary rules, that we should take care not 


1 I.e. syllogisms whose premisses are believed, but not known, to be true. 


363 


364 


365 


366 


12 Rules for the Direction of the Mind 


to waste our time by neglecting easy tasks and occupying ourselves only 
with difficult matters. That is just what many people do: they ingeniously 
construct the most subtle conjectures and plausible arguments on difficult 
questions, but after all their efforts they come to realize, too late, that 
rather than acquiring any knowledge, they have merely increased the 
number of their doubts. 

Of all the sciences so far discovered, arithmetic and geometry alone 
are, as we said above, free from any taint of falsity or uncertainty. If we 
are to give a careful estimate of the reason why this should be so, we 
should bear in mind that there are two ways of arriving at a knowledge of 
things — through experience and through deduction. Moreover, we must 
note that while our experiences of things are often deceptive, the 
deduction or pure inference of one thing from another can never be 
performed wrongly by an intellect which is in the least degree rational, 
though we may fail to make the inference if we do not see it. Fur- 
thermore, those chains with which dialecticians! suppose they regulate 
human reason seem to me to be of little use here, though I do not deny 
that they are very useful for other purposes. In fact none of the errors to 
which men — men, I say, not the brutes — are liable is ever due to faulty 
inference; they are due only to the fact that men take for granted certain 
poorly understood observations,” or lay down rash and groundless 
judgements. 

These considerations make it obvious why arithmetic and geometry 
prove to be much more certain than other disciplines: they alone are 
concerned with an object so pure and simple that they make no 
assumptions that experience might render uncertain; they consist entirely 
in deducing conclusions by means of rational arguments. They are 
therefore the easiest and clearest of all the sciences and have just the sort 
of object we are looking for. Where these sciences are concerned it 
scarcely seems humanly possible to err, except through inadvertence. Yet 
we should not be surprised if many prefer of their own accord to apply 
their minds to other arts, or to philosophy. The reason for this is that 
everyone feels free to make more confident guesses about matters which 
are obscure than about matters which are clear. It is much easier to 
hazard some conjecture on this or that question than to arrive at the 
exact truth about one particular question, however straightforward it 
may be. 

Now the conclusion we should draw from these considerations is not 
that arithmetic and geometry are the only sciences worth studying, but 
rather that in seeking the right path of truth we ought to concern 


1 Descartes’ term for scholastic logic see below, Principles, p. 186. 
2 Lat. experimenta; see footnote on the equivalent French term expériences, p. 143 below. 


Rule Three 13 


ourselves only with objects which admit of as much certainty as the 
demonstrations of arithmetic and geometry. 


Rule Three 


Concerning objects proposed for study, we ought to investigate what we 
can clearly and evidently intuit' or deduce with certainty, and not what 
other people have thought or what we ourselves conjecture. For know- 
ledge* can be attained in no other way. 


We ought to read the writings of the ancients, for it is of great advantage 
to be able to make use of the labours of so many men. We should do so 
both in order to learn what truths have already been discovered and also 
to be informed about the points which remain to be worked out in the 
various disciplines. But at the same time there is a considerable danger 
that if we study these works too closely traces of their errors will infect us 
and cling to us against our will and despite our precautions. For, once 
writers have credulously and heedlessly taken up a position on some 
controversial question, they are generally inclined to employ the most 
subtle arguments in an attempt to get us to adopt their point of view. On 
the other hand, whenever they have the luck to discover something 
certain and evident, they always present it wrapped up in various 
obscurities, either because they fear that the simplicity of their argument 
may depreciate the importance of their finding, or because they begrudge 
"us the plain truth. 

But even if all writers were sincere and open, and never tried to palm 
off doubtful matters as true, but instead put forward everything in good 
faith, we would always be uncertain which of them to believe, for hardly 
anything is said by one writer the contrary of which is not asserted by 
some other. It would be of no use to count heads, so as to follow the view 
which many authorities hold. For if the question at issue is a difficult one, 
it is more likely that few, rather than many, should have been able to 
discover the truth about it. But even if they all agreed among themselves, 
their teaching would still not be all we need. For example, even though 
we know other people’s demonstrations by heart, we shall never become 
mathematicians if we lack the intellectual aptitude to solve any given 
problem. And even though we have read all the arguments of Plato and 
Aristotle, we shall never become philosophers if we are unable to make a 
sound judgement on matters which come up for discussion; in this case 
what we would seem to have learnt would not be science but history. 


1 Lat. intueri, literally ‘to look, gaze at’; used by Descartes as a technical term for 
immediate mental apprehension. 
2 Lat. scientia; see footnote on p. 10 above. 


367 


368 


369 


14 Rules for the Direction of the Mind 


Furthermore, we would be well-advised not to mix any conjectures 
into the judgements we make about the truth of things. It is most 
important to bear this point in mind. The main reason why we can find 
nothing in ordinary philosophy which is so evident and certain as to be 
beyond dispute is that students of the subject first of all are not content to 
acknowledge what is clear and certain, but on the basis of merely 
probable conjectures venture also to make assertions on obscure matters 
about which nothing is known; they then gradually come to have 
complete faith in these assertions, indiscriminately mixing them up with 
others that are true and evident. The result is that the only conclusions 
they can draw are ones which apparently rest on some such obscure 
proposition, and which are accordingly uncertain. 

But in case we in turn should slip into the same error, let us now review 
all the actions of the intellect by means of which we are able to arrive at a 
knowledge of things with no fear of being mistaken. We recognize only 
two: intuition and deduction. ! 

By ‘intuition’ I do not mean the fluctuating testimony of the senses or 
the deceptive judgement of the imagination as it botches things together, 
but the conception of a clear and attentive mind, which is so easy and 
distinct that there can be no room for doubt about what we are 
understanding. Alternatively, and this comes to the same thing, intuition 
is the indubitable conception of a clear and attentive mind which 
proceeds solely from the light of reason. Because it is simpler, it is more 
certain than deduction, though deduction, as we noted above, is not 
something a man can perform wrongly. Thus everyone can mentally 
intuit that he exists, that he is thinking, that a triangle is bounded by just 
three lines, and a sphere by a single surface, and the like. Perceptions such 
as these are more numerous than most people realize, disdaining as they 
do to turn their minds to such simple matters. 

In case anyone should be troubled by my novel use of the term 
‘intuition’ and of other terms to which I shall be forced to give a different 
meaning from their ordinary one, I wish to point out here that I am 
paying no attention to the way these terms have lately been used in the 
Schools. For it would be very difficult for me to employ the same term- 
inology, when my own views are profoundly different. I shall take 
account only of the meanings in Latin of individual words and, when 
appropriate words are lacking, I shall use what seem the most suitable 
words, adapting them to my own meaning. 

The self-evidence and certainty of intuition is required not only for 
apprehending single propositions, but also for any train of reasoning 


1 inductio in A, almost certainly a misprint for deductio. 


Rule Four 15 


whatever. Take for example, the inference that 2 plus 2 equals 3 plus 1: 
not only must we intuitively perceive that 2 plus 2 make 4, and that 3 
plus 1 make 4, but also that the original proposition follows necessarily 
from the other two. 

There may be some doubt here about our reason for suggesting 
another mode of knowing in addition to intuition, viz. deduction, by 
which we mean the inference of something as following necessarily from 
some other propositions which are known with certainty. But this 
distinction had to be made, since very many facts which are not 
self-evident are known with certainty, provided they are inferred from 
true and known principles through a continuous and uninterrupted 
movement of thought in which each individual proposition is clearly 
intuited. This is similar to the way in which we know that the last link in 
a long chain is connected to the first: even if we cannot take in at one 
glance all the intermediate links on which the connection depends, we 
can have knowledge of the connection provided we survey the links one 
after the other, and keep in mind that each link from first to last is 
attached to its neighbour. Hence we are distinguishing mental intuition 
from certain deduction on the grounds that we are aware of a movement 
or a sort of sequence in the latter but not in the former, and also because 
immediate self-evidence is not required for deduction, as it is for intuition; 
deduction in a sense gets its certainty from memory. It follows that those 
propositions which are immediately inferred from first principles can be 
said to be known in one respect through intuition, and in another respect 
through deduction. But the first principles themselves are known only 
through intuition, and the remote conclusions only through deduction. 

These two ways are the most certain routes to knowledge that we 
have. So far as our powers of understanding are concerned, we should 
admit no more than these and should reject all others as suspect and 
liable to error. This does not preclude our believing that what has been 
revealed by God is more certain than any knowledge, since faith in these 
matters, as in anything obscure, is an act of the will rather than an act of 
the understanding. And if our faith has a basis in our intellect, revealed 
truths above all can and should be discovered by one or other of the two 
ways we have just described, as we may show at greater length below. 


Rule Four 


We need a method if we are to investigate the truth of things. 


So blind is the curiosity with which mortals are possessed that they often 
direct their minds down untrodden paths, in the groundless hope that 
they will chance upon what they are seeking, rather like someone who is 


370 


371 


372 


373 


16 Rules for the Direction of the Mind 


consumed with such a senseless desire to discover treasure that he 
continually roams the streets to see if he can find any that a passer-by 
might have dropped. This is how almost every chemist, most geometers, 
and many philosophers pursue their research. I am not denying that they 
sometimes are lucky enough in their wanderings to hit upon some truth, 
though on that account I rate them more fortunate than diligent. But it is 
far better never to contemplate investigating the truth about any matter 
than to do so without a method. For it is quite certain that such 
haphazard studies and obscure reflections blur the natural light and blind 
our intelligence. Those who are accustomed to walking in the dark 
weaken their eye-sight, the result being that they can no longer bear to be 
in broad daylight. Experience confirms this, for we very often find that 
people who have never devoted their time to learned studies make 
sounder and clearer judgements on matters which arise than those who 
have spent all their time in the Schools. By ‘a method’ I mean reliable 
rules which are easy to apply, and such that if one follows them exactly, 
one will never take what is false to be true or fruitlessly expend one’s 
mental efforts, but will gradually and constantly increase one’s 
knowledge! till one arrives at a true understanding of everything within 
one’s capacity. 

There are two points here which we should keep in mind: we should 
never assume to be true anything which is false; and our goal should be to 
attain knowledge of all things. For, if we do not know something we are 
capable of knowing, this is simply because we have never discovered a 
way that might lead us to such knowledge, or because we have fallen into 
the opposite error.” But if our method properly explains how we should 
use our mental intuition to avoid falling into the opposite error and how 
we should go about finding the deductive inferences that will help us 
attain this all-embracing knowledge, then I do not see that anything more 
is needed to make it complete; for as I have already said, we can have no 
knowledge! without mental intuition or deduction. The method cannot 
go so far as to teach us how to perform the actual operations of intuition 
and deduction, since these are the simplest of all and quite basic. If our 
intellect were not already able to perform them, it would not compre- 
hend any of the rules of the method, however easy they might be. As for 
other mental operations which dialectic’ claims to direct with the help of 
those already mentioned, they are of no use here, or rather should be 
reckoned a positive hindrance, for nothing can be added to the clear light 
of reason which does not in some way dim it. 


1 Lat. scientia; see footnote on p. 10 above. 
2 I.e. rejecting what is true through undue scepticism. 
3 See footnote on p. 12 above. 


Rule Four 17 


So useful is this method that without it the pursuit of learning would, | 
think, be more harmful than profitable. Hence I can readily believe that 
the great minds of the past were to some extent aware of it, guided to it 
even by nature alone. For the human mind has within it a sort of spark of 
the divine, in which the first seeds of useful ways of thinking are sown, 
seeds which, however neglected and stifled by studies which impede 
them, often bear fruit of their own accord. This is our experience in the 
simplest of sciences, arithmetic and geometry: we are well aware that the 
geometers of antiquity employed a sort of analysis which they went on to 
apply to the solution of every problem, though they begrudged revealing 
it to posterity. At the present time a sort of arithmetic called ‘algebra’ is 
flourishing, and this is achieving for numbers what the ancients did for 
figures. These two disciplines are simply the spontaneous fruits which 
have sprung from the innate principles of this method. I am not surprised 
that, where the simplest objects of these disciplines are concerned, there 
has been a richer harvest of such fruits than in other disciplines in which 
greater obstacles tend to stifle progress. But no doubt these too could 
achieve a perfect maturity if only they were cultivated with extreme care. 

That is in fact what I have principally aimed at achieving in this 
treatise. I would not value these Rules so highly if they were good only 
for solving those pointless problems with which arithmeticians and 
geometers are inclined to while away their time, for in that case all | 
could credit myself with achieving would be to dabble in trifles with 
greater subtlety than they. I shall have much to say below about figures 
and numbers, for no other disciplines can yield illustrations as evident 
and certain as these. But if one attends closely to my meaning, one will 
readily see that ordinary mathematics is far from my mind here, that it is 
quite another discipline | am expounding, and that these illustrations are 
more its outer garments than its inner parts. This discipline should 
contain the primary rudiments of human reason and extend to the 
discovery of truths in any field whatever. Frankly speaking, I am 
convinced that it is a more powerful instrument of knowledge than any 
other with which human beings are endowed, as it is the source of all the 
rest. | have spoken of its ‘outer garment’, not because I wish to conceal 
this science and shroud it from the gaze of the public; I wish rather to 
clothe and adorn it so as to make it easier to present to the human mind. 

When I first applied my mind to the mathematical disciplines, I at once 
read most of the customary lore which mathematical writers pass on to 
us. I paid special attention to arithmetic and geometry, for these were 
said to be the simplest and, as it were, to lead into the rest. But in neither 
subject did I come across writers who fully satisfied me. I read much 
about numbers which I found to be true once I had gone over the 


374 


375 


376 


18 Rules for the Direction of the Mind 


calculations for myself. The writers displayed many geometrical truths 
before my very eyes, as it were, and derived them by means of logical 
arguments. But they did not seem to make it sufficiently clear to my mind 
why these things should be so and how they were discovered. So I was 
not surprised to find that even many clever and learned men, after 
dipping into these arts, either quickly lay them aside as childish and 
pointless or else take them to be so very difficult and complicated that 
they are put off at the outset from learning them. For there is really 
nothing more futile than so busying ourselves with bare numbers and 
imaginary figures that we seem to rest content in the knowledge of such 
trifles. And there is nothing more futile than devoting our energies to 
those superficial proofs which are discovered more through chance than 
method and which have more to do with our eyes and imagination than 
our intellect; for the outcome of this is that, in a way, we get out of the 
habit of using our reason. At the same time there is nothing more 
complicated than using such a method of proof to resolve new problems 
which are beset with numerical disorder. Later on I wondered why the 
founders of philosophy would admit no one to the pursuit of wisdom 
who was unversed in mathematics! — as if they thought that this 
discipline was the easiest and most indispensable of all for cultivating and 
preparing the mind to grasp other more important sciences. | came to 
suspect that they were familiar with a kind of mathematics quite different 
from the one which prevails today; not that I thought they had a perfect 
knowledge of it, for their wild exultations and thanksgivings for trivial 
discoveries clearly show how rudimentary their knowledge must have 
been. I am not shaken in this opinion by those machines? of theirs which 
are so much praised by historians. These mechanical devices may well 
have been quite simple, even though the ignorant and wonder-loving 
masses may have raised them to the level of marvels. But I am convinced 
that certain primary seeds of truth naturally implanted in human minds 
thrived vigorously in that unsophisticated and innocent age — seeds 
which have been stifled in us through our constantly reading and hearing 
all sorts of errors. So the same light of the mind which enabled them to 
see (albeit without knowing why) that virtue is preferable to pleasure, the 
good preferable to the useful, also enabled them to grasp true ideas in 
philosophy and mathematics, although they were not yet able fully to 
master such sciences. Indeed, one can even see some traces of this true 
mathematics, I think, in Pappus and Diophantus? who, though not of 


1 A reference to Plato’s Academy, over the entrance to which was inscribed the motto, ‘No 
one ignorant of geometry may enter.’ 

2. Perhaps an allusion to mechanical devices such as the wooden dove (which could fly) 
constructed by Archytas of Tarentum, a friend of Plato. 

3 Greek mathematicians working in Alexandria in the third century A.D. 


Rule Four 19 


that earliest antiquity, lived many centuries before our time. But | have 
come to think that these writers themselves, with a kind of pernicious 
cunning, later suppressed this mathematics as, notoriously, many 
inventors are known to have done where their own discoveries were 
concerned. They may have feared that their method, just because it was 
so easy and simple, would be depreciated if it were divulged; so to gain our 
admiration, they may have shown us, as the fruits of their method, some 
barren truths proved by clever arguments, instead of teaching us the 
method itself, which might have dispelled our admiration. In the present 
age some very gifted men have tried to revive this method, for the method 
seems to me to be none other than the art which goes by the outlandish 
name of ‘algebra’ — or at least it would be if algebra were divested of the 
multiplicity of numbers and incomprehensible figures which overwhelm 
it and instead possessed that abundance of clarity and simplicity which I 
believe the true mathematics ought to have. It was these thoughts which 
made me turn from the particular studies of arithmetic and geometry to a 
general investigation of mathematics. I began my investigation by 
inquiring what exactly is generally meant by the term ‘mathematics’! and 
why it is that, in addition to arithmetic and geometry, sciences such as 
astronomy, music, optics, mechanics, among others, are called branches 
of mathematics. To answer this it is not enough just to look at the 
etymology of the word, for, since the word ‘mathematics’ has the same 
meaning as ‘discipline’,” these subjects have as much right to be called 
‘mathematics’ as geometry has. Yet it is evident that almost anyone with 
the slightest education can easily tell the difference in any context 
between what relates to mathematics and what to the other disciplines. 
When I considered the matter more closely, I came to see that the 
exclusive concern of mathematics is with questions of order or measure 
and that it is irrelevant whether the measure in question involves 
numbers, shapes, stars, sounds, or any other object whatever. This made 
me realize that there must be a general science which explains all the 
points that can be raised concerning order and measure irrespective of 
the subject-matter, and that this science should be termed mathesis 
universalis’ — a venerable term with a well-established meaning — for it 
covers everything that entitles these other sciences to be called branches 
of mathematics. How superior it is to these subordinate sciences both in 
utility and simplicity is clear from the fact that it covers all they deal with, 
and more besides; and any difficulties it involves apply to these as well, 
whereas their particular subject-matter involves difficulties which it 
lacks. Now everyone knows the name of this subject and without even 
1 Descartes uses the term mathesis, from the Greek, waOnors, literally ‘learning’. 


2 Lat. disciplina, from discere, ‘to learn’. 
3 Le. ‘universal mathematics’. 


377 


378 


379 


380 


20 Rules for the Direction of the Mind 


studying it understands what its subject-matter is. So why is it that most 
people painstakingly pursue the other disciplines which depend on it, and 
no one bothers to learn this one? No doubt I would find that very 
surprising if I did not know that everyone thinks the subject too easy, and 
if I had not long since observed that the human intellect always bypasses 
subjects which it thinks it can easily master and directly hurries on to new 
and grander things. 

Aware how slender my powers are, I have resolved in my search for 
knowledge of things to adhere unswervingly to a definite order, always 
starting with the simplest and easiest things and never going beyond them 
till there seems to be nothing further which is worth achieving where they 
are concerned. Up to now, therefore, I have devoted all my energies to 
this universal mathematics, so that I think I shall be able in due course to 
tackle the somewhat more advanced sciences, without my efforts being 
premature. But before I embark on this task I shall try to bring together 
and arrange in an orderly manner whatever I thought noteworthy in my 
previous studies, so that when old age dims my memory I can readily 
recall it hereafter, if I need to, by consulting this book, and so that, 
having disburdened my memory, I can henceforth devote my mind more 
freely to what remains. 


Rule Five 


The whole method consists entirely in the ordering and arranging of the 
objects on which we must concentrate our mind’s eye if we are to 
discover some truth. We shall be following this method exactly if we first 
reduce complicated and obscure propositions step by step to simpler 
ones, and then, starting with the intuition of the simplest ones of all, try 
to ascend through the same steps to a knowledge of all the rest. 


This one Rule covers the most essential points in the whole of human 
endeavour. Anyone who sets out in quest of knowledge of things must 
follow this Rule as closely as he would the thread of Theseus if he were to 
enter the Labyrinth. But many people either do not reflect upon what the 
Rule prescribes, or ignore it altogether, or presume that they have no 
need of it. They frequently examine difficult problems in a very disorderly 
manner, behaving in my view as if they were trying to get from the 
bottom to the top of a building at one bound, spurning or failing to 
notice the stairs designed for that purpose. Astrologers all do likewise: 
they do not know the nature of the heavens and do not even make any 
accurate observations of celestial motions, yet they expect to be able to 
delineate the effects of these motions. So too do most of those who study 
mechanics apart from physics and, without any proper plan, construct 


Rule Six 21 


new instruments for producing motion. This applies also to those 
philosophers who take no account of experience and think that truth will 
spring from their brains like Minerva from the head of Jupiter. 

All those just mentioned are plainly violating this Rule. But the order 
that is required here is often so obscure and complicated that not 
everyone can make out what it is; hence it is virtually impossible to guard 
against going astray unless one carefully observes the message of the 
following Rule. 


Rule Six 


In order to distinguish the simplest things from those that are compli- 
cated and to set them out in an orderly manner, we should attend to what 
is most simple in each series of things in which we have directly deduced 
some truths from others, and should observe how all the rest are more, or 
less, or equally removed from the simplest. 


Although the message of this Rule may not seem very novel, it contains 
nevertheless the main secret of my method; and there is no more useful 
Rule in this whole treatise. For it instructs us that all things can be 
arranged serially in various groups, not in so far as they can be referred to 
some ontological genus (such as the categories into which philosophers 
divide things‘), but in so far as some things can be known on the basis of 
others. Thus when a difficulty arises, we can see at once whether it will be 
worth looking at any others first, and if so which ones and in what order. 

In order to be able to do this correctly, we should note first that 
everything, with regard to its possible usefulness to our project, may be 
termed either ‘absolute’ or ‘relative’ — our project being, not to inspect 
the isolated natures of things, but to compare them with each other so 
that some may be known on the basis of others. 

I call ‘absolute’ whatever has within it the pure and simple nature in 
question; that is, whatever is viewed as being independent, a cause, 
simple, universal, single, equal, similar, straight, and other qualities of 
that sort. I call this the simplest and the easiest thing when we can make 
use of it in solving problems. 

The ‘relative’, on the other hand, is what shares the same nature, or at 
least something of the same nature, in virtue of which we can relate it to 
the absolute and deduce it from the absolute in a definite series of steps. 
The concept of the ‘relative’ involves other terms besides, which I call 
‘relations’: these include whatever is said to be dependent, an effect, 
composite, particular, many, unequal, dissimilar, oblique, etc. The further 


1 For example, the Aristotelian categories of substance, quality, quantity, relation, etc. 


381 


382 


383 


22 Rules for the Direction of the Mind 


removed from the absolute such relative attributes are, the more mutu- 
ally dependent relations of this sort they contain. This Rule points out 
that all these relations should be distinguished, and the interconnections 
between them, and their natural order, should be noted, so that given the 
last term we should be able to reach the one that is absolute in the highest 
degree, by passing through all the intermediate ones. 

The secret of this technique consists entirely in our attentively noting in 
all things that which is absolute in the highest degree. For some things are 
more absolute than others from one point of view, yet more relative from 
a different point of view. For example, the universal is more absolute 
than the particular, in virtue of its having a simpler nature, but it can also 
be said to be more relative than the particular in that it depends upon 
particulars for its existence, etc. Again, certain things sometimes are 
really more absolute than others, yet not the most absolute of all. Thus a 
species is something absolute with respect to particulars, but with respect 
to the genus it is relative; and where measurable items are concerned, 
extension is something absolute, but among the varieties of extension 
length is something absolute, etc. Furthermore, in order to make it clear 
that what we are contemplating here is the series of things to be 
discovered, and not the nature of each of them, we have deliberately 
listed ‘cause’ and ‘equal’ among the absolutes, although their nature 
really is relative. Philosophers, of course, recognize that cause and effect 
are correlatives; but in the present case, if we want to know what the 
effect is, we must know the cause first, and not vice versa. Again, equals 
are correlative with one another, but we can know what things are 
unequal only by comparison with equals, and not vice versa, etc. 

Secondly, we should note that there are very few pure and simple 
natures which we can intuit straight off and per se (independently of any 
others) either in our sensory experience or by means of a light innate 
within us. We should, as I said, attend carefully to the simple natures 
which can be intuited in this way, for these are the ones which in each 
series we term simple in the highest degree. As for all the other natures, 
we can apprehend them only by deducing them from those which are 
simple in the highest degree, either immediately and directly, or by means 
of two or three or more separate inferences. In the latter case we should 
also note the number of these inferences so that we may know whether 
the separation between the conclusion and the primary and supremely 
simple proposition is by way of a greater or fewer number of steps. And 
the chain of inferences — which gives rise to those series of objects of 
investigation to which every problem must be reduced — is such 
throughout that the problem can be investigated by a reliable method. 


384 But since it is not easy to review all the connections together, and 


Rule Six 23 


moreover, since our task is not so much to retain them in our memory as 
to distinguish them with, as it were, the sharp edge of our mind, we must 
seek a means of developing our intelligence in such a way that we can 
discern these connections immediately whenever the need arises. In my 
experience there is no better way of doing this than by accustoming 
ourselves to reflecting with some discernment on the minute details of the 
things we have already perceived. 

The third and last point is that we should not begin our studies by 
investigating difficult matters. Before tackling any specific-problems we 
ought first to make a random selection of truths which happen to be at 
hand, and ought then to see whether we can deduce some other truths 
from them step by step, and from these still others, and so on in logical 
sequence. This done, we should reflect attentively on the truths we have 
discovered and carefully consider why it was we were able to discover 
some of these truths sooner and more easily than others, and what these 
truths are. This will enable us to judge, when tackling a specific problem, 
what points we may usefully concentrate on discovering first. For 
example, say the thought occurs to me that the number 6 is twice 3: I may 
then ask what twice 6 is, viz. 12; I may, if I like, go on to ask what twice 
12 1s, viz. 24, and what twice 24 is, viz. 48, etc. It would then be easy for 
me to deduce that there is the same ratio between 3 and 6 as between 6 
and 12, and again the same ratio between 12 and 24, etc., and hence that 
the numbers 3, 6, 12, 24, 48, etc. are continued proportionals. All of this 
is so clear as to seem almost childish; nevertheless when I think carefully 
about it, I can see what sort of complications are involved in all the 
questions one can ask about the proportions or relations between things, 
and in what order the questions should be investigated. This one point 
encompasses the essential core of the entire science of pure mathematics. 

For I notice first that it was no more difficult to discover what twice 6 
is than twice 3, and that whenever we find a ratio between any two 
magnitudes we can always find, just as easily, innumerable others which 
have the same ratio between them. The nature of the problem is no 
different when we are trying to find three, four, or more magnitudes of 
this sort, since each one has to be found separately and without regard to 
the others. I next observe that given the magnitudes 3 and 6, I easily 
found! a third magnitude which is in continued proportion, viz. 12, yet, 
when the extreme terms 3 and 12 were given, I could not find just as easily 
the mean proportional, 6. If we look into the reason for this, it is obvious 
that we have here a quite different type of problem from the preceding 
one. For, if we are to find the mean proportional, we must attend at the 


1 Reading invenerim, A (following Crapulli) rather than inveneris (‘you found’), H and 
AT. 


385 


386 


387 


24 Rules for the Direction of the Mind 


same time to the two extreme terms and the ratio between them, in order 
to obtain a new ratio by dividing this one.! This is a very different task 
from that of finding a third magnitude, given two magnitudes in 
continued proportion.” I can go even further and ask whether, given the 
numbers 3 and 24, it would be just as easy to find one of the two mean 
proportionals, viz. 6 and 12. Here we have another sort of problem 
again, an even more complicated one than either of the preceding ones. 
We have to attend not just to one thing or to two but to three different 
things at the same time, if we are to find a fourth. We can go even further 
and see whether, given just 3 and 48, it would be still more difficult to 
find one of the three mean proportionals, viz. 6, 12 and 24. At first sight 
it does indeed seem to be more difficult. But then the thought immediate- 
ly strikes us that this problem can be split up and made easier: first we 
look for the single mean proportional between 3 and 48, viz. 12; then we 
look for a further mean proportional between 3 and 12, viz. 6; then 
another between 12 and 48, viz. 24. In that way we reduce the problem 
to one of the second kind described above. 

Moreover, from these examples I realize how in our pursuit of 
knowledge of a given thing we can follow different paths, one of which is 
much more difficult and obscure than the other. If, for example, we are 
asked to find the four proportionals, 3, 6, 12, 24, given any two 
consecutive members of the series, such as 3 and 6, or 6 and 12, or 12 
and 24, it will be a very easy task to find the others. In this case we shall 
say that the proposition we are seeking is investigated in a direct way. But 
if two alternate numbers are given, such as 3 and 12, or 6 and 24, and we 
are to work out the others from these, in that case we shall say that the 
problem is investigated indirectly by the first method. Likewise, if we are 
to find the intermediate numbers, 6 and 12, given the two extremes, 3 
and 24, then the problem will be investigated indirectly by the second 
method. I could thus go on even further and draw many other conclu- 
sions from this one example. But these points will suffice to enable the 
reader to see what I mean when I say that some proposition is deduced 
‘directly’ or ‘indirectly’, and will suffice to make him bear in mind that on 
the basis of our knowledge of the most simple and primary things we can 
make many discoveries, even in other disciplines, through careful reflec- 
tion and discriminating inquiry. 


1 The problem: to find an x such that 3/x =x/12. 
2 The problem: to find an x such that 3/6 = 6/x. 
3 The problem: to find an x and y such that 3/x = x/y=y/24. 


Rule Seven 25 


Rule Seven 


In order to make our knowledge! complete, every single thing relating to 
our undertaking must be surveyed in a continuous and wholly uninter- 
rupted sweep of thought, and be included in a sufficient and well-ordered 
enumeration. 


It is necessary to observe the points proposed in this Rule if we are to 
admit as certain those truths which, we said above, are not deduced 
immediately from first and self-evident principles. For this deduction 
sometimes requires such a long chain of inferences that when we arrive at 
such a truth it is not easy to recall the entire route which led us to it. That 
is why we say that a continuous movement of thought is needed to make 
good any weakness of memory. If, for example, by way of separate 
operations, | have come to know first what the relation between the 
magnitudes A and B is, and then between B and C, and between C and D, 
and finally between D and E, that does not entail my seeing what the 
relation is between A and E; and I cannot grasp what the relation is just 
from those I already know, unless I recall all of them. So I shall run 
through them several times in a continuous movement of the imagina- 
tion, ‘simultaneously intuiting one relation and passing on to the next, 
until I have learnt to pass from the first to the last so swiftly that memory 
is left with practically no role to play, and I seem to intuit the whole thing 
at once. In this way our memory is relieved, the sluggishness of our 
intelligence redressed, and its capacity in some way enlarged. 

In addition, this movement must nowhere be interrupted. Frequently 
those who attempt to deduce something too swiftly and from remote 
initial premisses do not go over the entire chain of intermediate conclu- 
sions very carefully, but pass over many of the steps without due 
consideration. But, whenever even the smallest link is overlooked the 
chain is immediately broken, and the certainty of the conclusion entirely 
collapses. 

We maintain furthermore that enumeration is required for the comple- 
tion of our knowledge.’ The other Rules do indeed help us resolve most 
questions, but it is only with the aid of enumeration that we are able to 
make a true and certain judgement about whatever we apply our minds 
to. By means of enumeration nothing will wholly escape us and we shall 
be seen to have some knowledge on every question. 

In this context enumeration,” or induction, consists in a thorough 
investigation of all the points relating to the problem at hand, an 
investigation which is so careful and accurate that we may conclude with 


1 Lat. scientia; see footnote on p. 10 above. 
2 Reading hic, A, H (following Crapulli), rather than baec (‘This enumeration’), AT. 


388 


389 


390 


26 Rules for the Direction of the Mind 


manifest certainty that we have not inadvertently overlooked anything. 
So even though the object of our inquiry eludes us, provided we have 
made an enumeration we shall be wiser at least to the extent that we shall 
perceive with certainty that it could not possibly be discovered by any 
method known to us. If we have managed to examine all the humanly 
accessible paths towards the object of our inquiry (which we often do), 
we shall be entitled confidently to assert that knowledge of it lies wholly 
beyond the reach of the human mind. 

We should note, moreover, that by ‘sufficient enumeration’ or ‘induc- 
tion’ we just mean the kind of enumeration which renders the truth of 
our conclusions more certain than any other kind of proof (simple 
intuition excepted) allows. But when our knowledge of something is not 
reducible to simple intuition and we have cast off our syllogistic fetters, 
we are left with this one path, which we should stick to with complete 
confidence. For if we have deduced one fact from another immediately, 
then provided the inference is evident, it already comes under the heading 
of true intuition. If on the other hand we infer a proposition from many 
disconnected propositions, our intellectual capacity is often insufficient 
to enable us to encompass all of them in a single intuition; in which case 
we must be content with the level of certainty which the above operation 
allows. In the same way, our eyes cannot distinguish at one glance all the 
links in a very long chain; but, if we have seen the connections between 
each link and its neighbour, this enables us to say that we have seen how 
the last link is connected with the first. 

I said that this operation should be ‘sufficient’, because it can often be 
deficient and hence liable to error. For sometimes, even though we survey 
many points in our enumeration which are quite evident, yet if we make 
even the slightest omission, the chain is broken and the certainty of the 
conclusion is entirely lost. Again, sometimes we do cover everything in 
our enumeration, yet fail to distinguish one thing from another, so that 
our knowledge of them all is simply confused. 

The enumeration should sometimes be complete, and sometimes 
distinct, though there are times when it need be neither. That is why I 
said only that the enumeration must be sufficient. For if I wish to 
determine by enumeration how many kinds of corporeal entity there are 
or how many are in some way perceivable by the senses, I shall not 
assert that there are just so many and no more, unless I have previously 
made sure | have included them all in my enumeration and have 
distinguished one from another. But if I wish to show in the same way 
that the rational soul is not corporeal, there is no need for the 
enumeration to be complete; it will be sufficient if I group all bodies 
together into several classes so as to demonstrate that the rational soul 


Rule Seven 27 


cannot be assigned to any of these. To give one last example, say I wish to 
show by enumeration that the area of a circle is greater than the area of 
any other geometrical figure whose perimeter is the same length as the 
circle’s. I need not review every geometrical figure. If I can demonstrate 
that this fact holds for some particular figures, I shall be entitled to 
conclude by induction! that the same holds true in all the other cases as 
well. 

I said also that the enumeration must be well-ordered, partly because 
there is no more effective remedy for the defects I have just listed than a 
well-ordered scrutiny of all the relevant items, and partly because, if 
every single thing relevant to the question in hand were to be separately 
scrutinized, one lifetime would generally be insufficient for the task, for 
either there would be too many such things or the same things would 
keep cropping up. But if we arrange all of the relevant items in the best 
order, so that for the most part they fall under definite classes, it will be 
sufficient if we look closely at one class, or at a member of each particular 
class, or at some classes rather than others. If we do that, we shall at any 
rate never pointlessly go over the same ground twice, and thanks to our 
well-devised order, we shall often manage to review quickly and effort- 
lessly a large number of items which at first sight seemed formidably 
large. 

In such cases the order in which things are enumerated can usually be 
varied; it is a matter for individual choice. For that reason, if our choice is 
to be intelligently thought out we should bear in mind what was said in 
Rule Five. In the more frivolous of man’s skills there are many things 
whose method of invention consists entirely in arranging things in this 
orderly way. Thus if you want to construct a perfect anagram by 
transposing the letters of a name, there is no need to pass from the very 
easy to the more difficult, nor to distinguish what is absolute from what is 
relative, for these operations have no place here. All you need do is to 
decide on an order for examining permutations of letters so that you 
never go over the same permutations twice. The number of these 
permutations should, for example, be arranged into definite classes, so 
that it becomes immediately obvious which ones present the greater 
prospect of finding what you are looking for. If this is done, the task will 
seldom be tedious; it will be mere child’s play. 

Now, these last three Rules should not be separated. We should 
generally think of them together, since they all contribute equally to the 
perfection of the method. It was immaterial which of them we expound- 
ed first. We are giving only a brief account of them here, for our task in 


1 ‘Induction’ here seems to have its standard sense of ‘inference from particular instances 
of something to all instances’. 


591 


392 


393 


28 Rules for the Direction of the Mind 


the remainder of the treatise will be confined almost entirely to explicat- 
ing in detail what we have so far covered in general terms. 


Rule Eight 


If in the series of things to be examined we come across something which 
our intellect is unable to intuit sufficiently well, we must stop at that 
point, and refrain from the superfluous task of examining the remaining 
items. 


The three preceding Rules prescribe and explain the order to be followed; 
the present Rule shows when order is absolutely necessary, and when it is 
merely useful. It is necessary that we examine whatever constitutes an 
integral step in the series through which we must pass when we proceed 
from relative terms to something absolute or vice versa, before consider- 
ing all that follows in the series. Of course if many things belong to a 
given step, as is often the case, it is always useful to survey all of them in 
due order. But we are not forced to follow the order strictly and rigidly; 
generally we may proceed further, even although we do not have clear 
knowledge of all the terms of the series, but only of a few or just one of 
them. 

This Rule is a necessary consequence of the reasons I gave in support of 
Rule Two. But it should not be thought that this Rule contributes 
nothing new to the advancement of learning, even though it seems merely 
to deter us from discussing certain things and to bring no truth to light. 
Indeed, all it teaches beginners is that they should not waste their efforts, 
and it does so in practically the same manner as Rule Two. But it shows 
those who have perfectly mastered the preceding seven Rules how they 
can achieve for themselves, in any science whatever, results so satisfac- 
tory that there is nothing further they will desire to achieve. If anyone 
observes the above Rules exactly when trying to solve some problem or 
other, but is instructed by the present Rule to stop at a certain point, he 
will know for sure that no amount of application will enable him to find 
the knowledge! he is seeking; and that not because of any defect of his 
intelligence, but because of the obstacle which the nature of the problem 
itself or the human condition presents. His recognition of this point is 
just as much knowledge! as that which reveals the nature of the thing 
itself; and it would, I think, be quite irrational if he were to stretch his 
curiosity any further. 

Let us illustrate these points with one or two examples. If, say, 
someone whose studies are confined to mathematics tries to find the line 


394 called the ‘anaclastic’ in optics* — the line from which parallel rays are so 


1 Lat. scientia; see footnote on p. 10 above. 
2 Descartes solved this problem in Discourse 8 of his Optics. 


Rule Eight 29 


refracted that they intersect at a single point — he will easily see, by 
following Rules Five and Six, that the determination of this line depends 
on the ratio of the angles of refraction to the angles of incidence. But he 
will not be able to find out what this ratio is, since it has to do with 
physics rather than with mathematics. So he will be compelled to stop 
short right at the outset. If he proposes to learn it from the philosophers 
or derive it from experience, he will achieve nothing, for that would be to 
violate Rule Three. Besides, the problem before him is composite and 
relative; and it is possible to have experiential knowledge which is certain 
only of things which are entirely simple and absolute, as I shall show in 
the appropriate place. Again, it is no use his assuming some particular 
ratio between the angles in question, one he conjectures to be most likely 
the real one; for in that case what he was seeking to determine would no 
longer be the anaclastic — it would merely be the line which was the 
logical consequence of his supposition. 

Now take someone whose studies are not confined to mathematics and 
who, following Rule One, eagerly seeks the truth on any question that 
arises: if he is faced with the same problem, he will discover when he 
goes into it that the ratio between the angles of incidence and the angles 
of refraction depends upon the changes in these angles brought about by 
differences in the media. He will see that these changes depend on the 
manner in which a ray passes through the entire transparent body,' and 
that knowledge of this process presupposes also a knowledge of the 
nature of the action of light. Lastly, he will see that to understand the 
latter process he must know what a natural power in general is — this last 
being the most absolute term in this whole series. Once he has clearly 
ascertained this through mental intuition, he will, in accordance with 
Rule Five, retrace his course through the same steps. If, at the second 
step, he is unable to discern at once what the nature of light’s action is, in 
accordance with Rule Seven he will make an enumeration of all the other 
natural powers, in the hope that a knowledge of some other natural 
power will help him understand this one, if only by way of analogy — but 
more of this later.*, Having done that, he will investigate the way in which 
the ray passes through the whole transparent body. Thus he will follow 
up the remaining points in due order, until he arrives at the anaclastic 
itself. Even though the anaclastic has been the object of much fruitless 
research in the past, I can see nothing to prevent anyone who uses our 
method exactly from gaining a clear knowledge of it. 

But let us take the finest example of all. If someone sets himself the 


1 Lat. totum diaphanum, the very fluid ‘subtle matter’ which Descartes took to be the 
medium of the transmission of light. Cf. Optics, p. 154 below. 

2 This topic is not discussed in the extant portions of the Rules. See however Optics, 
Discourses 1 and 2 (pp. 152-64 below). 


395 


396 


397 


30 Rules for the Direction of the Mind 


problem of investigating every truth for the knowledge of which human 
reason is adequate — and this, | think, is something everyone who 
earnestly strives after good sense should do once in his life — he will 
indeed discover by means of the Rules we have proposed that nothing 
can be known prior to the intellect, since knowledge of everything else 
depends on the intellect, and not vice versa. Once he has surveyed 
everything that follows immediately upon knowledge of the pure intel- 
lect, among what remains he will enumerate whatever instruments of 
knowledge we possess in addition to the intellect; and there are only two 
of these, namely imagination and sense-perception. He will therefore 
devote all his energies to distinguishing and examining these three modes 
of knowing. He will see that there can be no truth or falsity in the strict 
sense except in the intellect alone, although truth and falsity often 
originate from the other two modes of knowing; and he will pay careful 
heed to everything that might deceive him, in order to guard against it. 
He will make a precise enumeration of all the paths to truth which are 
open to men, so that he may follow one which is reliable. There are not 
so many of these that he cannot easily discover them all by means of a 
sufficient enumeration;! this will seem surprising and incredible to the 
inexperienced. And as soon as he has distinguished, with respect to each 
individual object, between those items of knowledge which merely fill 
and adorn the memory and those which really entitle one to be called 
more learned — an easy task to accomplish . . .* he will take the view that 
any lack of further knowledge on his part is not at all due to any lack of 
intelligence or method, and that whatever anyone else can know, he too 
is capable of knowing, if only he properly applies his mind to it. He may 
often be faced with many questions which this Rule prohibits him from 
taking up; yet, because he sees clearly that these questions are wholly 
beyond the reach of the human mind, he will not regard himself as being 
more ignorant on that account. On the contrary, his very knowing that 
the matter in question is beyond the bounds of human knowledge will, if 
he is reasonable, abundantly satisfy his curiosity. 

Now, to prevent our being in a state of permanent uncertainty about 
the powers of the mind, and to prevent our mental labours being 
misguided and haphazard, we ought once in our life carefully to inquire 
as to what sort of knowledge human reason is capable of attaining, 
before we set about acquiring knowledge of things in particular. In order 
to do this the better, we should, where the objects of inquiry are equally 
simple, always begin our investigation with those which are more useful. 


1 The translation follows the punctuation of A and H here. AT punctuate so as to give the 
sense ‘... enumeration. What will seem surprising is that as soon as...’ 
2, A lacuna in the texts A, H. 


Rule Eight 31 


Our method in fact resembles the procedures in the mechanical crafts, 
which have no need of methods other than their own, and which supply 
their own instructions for making their own tools. If, for example, 
someone wanted to practise one of these crafts — to become a blacksmith, 
say — but did not possess any of the tools, he would be forced at first to 
use a hard stone (or a rough lump of iron) as an anvil, to make a rock do 
as a hammer, to make a pair of tongs out of wood, and to put together 
other such tools as the need arose. Thus prepared, he would not 
immediately attempt to forge swords, helmets, or other iron implements 
for others to use; rather he would first of all make hammers, an anvil, 
tongs and other tools for his own use. What this example shows is that, 
since in these preliminary inquiries we have managed to discover only 
some rough precepts which appear to be innate in our minds rather than 
the product of any skill, we should not immediately try to use these 
precepts to settle philosophical disputes or to solve mathematical prob- 
lems. Rather, we should use these precepts in the first instance to seek out 
with extreme care everything else which is more essential in the 
investigation of truth, especially since there is no reason why such things 
should be thought more difficult to discover than any of the solutions to 
the problems commonly set in geometry, in physics, or in other disci- 
plines. 

But the most useful inquiry we can make at this stage is to ask: What is 
human knowledge and what is its scope? We are at present treating this 
as one single question, which in our view is the first question of all that 398 
should be examined by means of the Rules described above. This is a task 
which everyone with the slightest love of truth ought to undertake at 
least once in his life, since the true instruments of knowledge and the 
entire method are involved in the investigation of the problem. There is, I 
think, nothing more foolish than presuming, as many do, to argue about 
the secrets of nature, the influence of the heavens on these lower regions, 
the prediction of future events, and so on, without ever inquiring whether 
human reason is adequate for discovering matters such as these. It should 
not be regarded as an arduous or even difficult task to define the limits of 
the mental powers we are conscious of possessing, since we often have no 
hesitation in making judgements about things which are outside us and 
quite foreign to us. Nor is it an immeasurable task to seek to encompass 
in thought everything in the universe, with a view to learning in what 
way particular things may be susceptible of investigation by the human 
mind. For nothing can be so many-sided or diffuse that it cannot be 
encompassed within definite limits or arranged under a few headings by 
means of the method of enumeration we have been discussing. But in 
order to see how the above points apply to the problem before us, we 


399 


400 


32 Rules for the Direction of the Mind 


shall first divide into two parts whatever is relevant to the question; for 
the question ought to relate either to us, who have the capacity for 
knowledge, or to the actual things it is possible to know. We shall discuss 
these two parts separately. 

Within ourselves we are aware that, while it is the intellect alone that is 
capable of knowledge,' it can be helped or hindered by three other 
faculties, viz. imagination, sense-perception, and memory. We must 
therefore look at these faculties in turn, to see in what respect each of 
them could be a hindrance, so that we may be on our guard, and in what 
respect an asset, so that we may make full use of their resources. We 
shall discuss this part of the question by way of a sufficient enumeration, 
as the following Rule will make clear. 

We should then turn to the things themselves; and we should deal with 
these only in so far as they are within the reach of the intellect. In that 
respect we divide them into absolutely simple natures and complex or 
composite natures. Simple natures must all be either spiritual or cor- 
poreal, or belong to each of these categories. As for composite natures, 
there are some which the intellect experiences as composite before it 
decides to determine anything about them: but there are others which are 
put together by the intellect itself. All these points will be explained at 
greater length in Rule Twelve, where it will be demonstrated that there 
can be no falsity save in composite natures which are put together by the 
intellect. In view of this, we divide natures of the latter sort into two 
further classes, viz. those that are deduced from natures which are the 
most simple and self-evident (which we shall deal with throughout the 
next book), and those that presuppose others which experience shows us 
to be composite in reality. We shall reserve the whole of the third book 
for an account of the latter. 

Throughout this treatise we shall try to pursue every humanly accessi- 
ble path which leads to knowledge of the truth. We shall do this very 
carefully, and show the paths to be very easy, so that anyone who has 
mastered the whole method, however mediocre his intelligence, may see 
that there are no paths closed to him that are open to others, and that his 
lack of further knowledge is not due to any want of intelligence or 
method. As often as he applies his mind to acquire knowledge of 
something, either he will be entirely successful, or at least he will realize 
that success depends upon some observation which it is not 
within his power to make — so he will not blame his intelligence, even 
though he is forced to come to a halt; or, finally, he will be able to 
demonstrate that the thing he wants to know wholly exceeds the grasp of 


1 See footnote on p. 10 above. 2 See Preface, p. 7 above. 


Rule Nine 33 


the human mind — in which case he will not regard himself as more 
ignorant on that account, for this discovery amounts to knowledge! no 
less than any other. 


Rule Nine 


We must concentrate our mind’s eye totally upon the most insignificant 
and easiest of matters, and dwell on them long enough to acquire the 
habit of intuiting the truth distinctly and clearly. 


We have given an account of the two operations of our intellect, intuition 
and deduction, on which we must, as we said, exclusively rely in our 
acquisition of knowledge. In this and the following Rule we shall proceed 
to explain how we can make our employment of intuition and deduction 
more skilful and at the same time how to cultivate two special mental 
faculties, viz. perspicacity in the distinct intuition of particular things and 
discernment in the methodical deduction of one thing from another. 

We can best learn how mental intuition is to be employed by 
comparing it with ordinary vision. If one tries to look at many objects at 
one glance, one sees none of them distinctly. Likewise, if one is inclined 
to attend to many things at the same time in a single act of thought, one 
does so with a confused mind. Yet craftsmen who engage in delicate 
operations, and are used to fixing their eyes on a single point, acquire 
through practice the ability to make perfect distinctions between things, 
however minute and delicate. The same is true of those who never let 
their thinking be distracted by many different objects at the same time, 
but always devote their whole attention to the simplest and easiest of 
matters: they become perspicacious. 

It is, however, a common failing of mortals to regard what is more 
difficult as more attractive. Most people consider that they know 
nothing, even when they see a very clear and simple cause of something; 
yet at the same time they get carried away with certain sublime and 
far-fetched arguments of the philosophers, even though these are for the 
most part based on foundations which no one has ever thoroughly 
inspected. It is surely madness to think that there is more clarity in 
darkness than in light. But let us note, those who really do possess 
knowledge, can discern the truth with equal facility whether thay have 
derived it from a simple subject or from an obscure one. For once they 
have hit upon it, they grasp each truth by means of a single and distinct 
act which is similar in every case. The difference lies entirely in the route 
followed, which must surely be longer if it leads to a truth which is more 
remote from completely absolute first principles. 


1 Lat. scientia; see footnote on p. 10 above. 


401 


402 


403 


34 Rules for the Direction of the Mind 


Everyone ought therefore to acquire the habit of encompassing in his 
thought at one time facts which are very simple and very few in number — 
so much so that he never thinks he knows something unless he intuits it 
just as distinctly as any of the things he knows most distinctly of all. 
Some people of course are born with a much greater aptitude for this sort 
of insight than others; but our minds can become much better equipped 
for it through method and practice. There is, I think, one point above all 
others which I must stress here, which is that everyone should be firmly 
convinced that the sciences, however abstruse, are to be deduced only 
from matters which are easy and highly accessible, and not from those 
which are grand and obscure. 

If, for example, I wish to inquire whether a natural power can travel 
instantaneously to a distant place, passing through the whole intervening 
space, I shall not immediately turn my attention to the magnetic force, or 
the influence of the stars, or even the speed of light, to see whether 
actions such as these might occur instantaneously; for I would find it 
more difficult to settle that sort of question than the one at issue. I shall, 
rather, reflect upon the local motions of bodies, since there can be 
nothing in this whole area that is more readily perceivable by the senses. 
And I shall realize that, while a stone cannot pass instantaneously from 
one place to another, since it is a body, a power similar to the one which 
moves the stone must be transmitted instantaneously if it is to pass, in its 
bare state, from one object to another. For instance, if | move one end of 
a stick, however long it may be, I can easily conceive that the power 
which moves that part of the stick necessarily moves every other part of it 
instantaneously, because it is the bare power which is transmitted at that 
moment, and not the power as it exists in some body, such as a stone 
which carries it along.! 

In the same way, if I want to know how one and the same simple cause 
can give rise simultaneously to opposite effects, I shall not have recourse 
to the remedies of the physicians, which drive out some humours and 
keep others in; nor shall I prattle on about the moon’s warming things by 
its light and cooling them by means of some occult quality. Rather, I shall 
observe a pair of scales, where a single weight raises one scale and lowers 
the other instantaneously, and similar examples. 


Rule Ten 


In order to acquire discernment we should exercise our intelligence by 
investigating what others have already discovered, and methodically 


1 Cf. Optics, pp. 153-5 below. 


Rule Ten 35 


survey even the most insignificant products of human skill, especially 
those which display or presuppose order. 


The natural bent of my mind, I confess, is such that the greatest pleasure I 
have taken in my studies has always come not from accepting the 
arguments of others but from discovering arguments by my own efforts. 
It was just this that attracted me to the study of the sciences while I was 
still in my youth. Whenever the title of a book gave promise of a new 
discovery, before I read any further I would try and see whether perhaps I 
could achieve a similar result by means of a certain innate discernment. 
And I took great care not to deprive myself of this innocent pleasure 
through a hasty reading of the book. So frequently was I successful in this 
that eventually I came to realize that I was no longer making my way to 
the truth of things as others do by way of aimless and blind inquiries, 
with the aid of luck rather than skill; rather, after many trials I had hit 
upon some reliable rules of great assistance in finding the truth, and | 
then used these to devise many more. In this way I carefully elaborated 
my whole method, and became convinced that the method of study I had 
pursued from the outset was the most useful of all. 

Still, since not all minds have such a natural disposition to puzzle 
things out by their own exertions, the message of this Rule is that we must 
not take up the more difficult and arduous issues immediately, but must 
first tackle the simplest and least exalted arts, and especially those in 
which order prevails — such as weaving and carpet-making, or the more 
feminine arts of embroidery, in which threads are interwoven in an 
infinitely varied pattern. Number-games and any games involving arith- 
metic, and the like, belong here. It is surprising how much all these 
activities exercise our minds, provided of course we discover them for 
ourselves and not from others. For, since nothing in these activities 
remains hidden and they are totally adapted to human cognitive capaci- 
ties, they present us in the most distinct way with innumerable instances 
of order, each one different from the other, yet all regular. Human 
discernment consists almost entirely in the proper observance of such 
order. 

It was for this reason that we insisted that our inquiries must proceed 
methodically. In these somewhat trivial subjects the method usually 
consists simply in constantly following an order, whether it is actually 
present in the matter in question or is ingeniously read into it. For 
example, say we want to read something written in an unfamiliar cypher 
which lacks any apparent order: what we shall do is to invent an order, 
SO as to test every conjecture we can make about individual letters, 
words, or sentences, and to arrange the characters in such a way that by 


404 


405 


406 


36 Rules for the Direction of the Mind 


an enumeration we may discover what can be deduced from them. Above 
all, we must guard against wasting our time by making random and 
unmethodical guesses about similarities. Even though problems such 
as these can often be solved without a method and can sometimes 
perhaps be solved more quickly through good luck than through method, 
nevertheless they might dim the light of the mind and make it become so 
habituated to childish and futile pursuits that thereafter it would always 
stick to the surface of things and would be unable to penetrate more 
deeply. But for all that we must not fall into the error of those who 
occupy their minds exclusively with serious and lofty issues, only to find 
that after much toil they gain, not the profound science they desired, but 
mere confusion. We must therefore practise these easier tasks first, and 
above all methodically, so that by following accessible and familiar paths 
we may grow accustomed, just as if we were playing a game, to 
penetrating always to the deeper truth of things. In this way we shall 
gradually find — much sooner than we might expect — that it is just as easy 
to deduce, on the basis of evident principles, many propositions which 
appear very difficult and complicated. 

Some will perhaps be surprised that in this context, where we are 
searching for ways of making ourselves more skilful at deducing some 
truths on the basis of others, we make no mention of any of the precepts 
with which dialecticians! suppose they govern human reason. They 
prescribe certain forms of reasoning in which the conclusions follow with 
such irresistible necessity that if our reason relies on them, even though it 
takes, as it were, a rest from considering a particular inference clearly and 
attentively, it can nevertheless draw a conclusion which is certain simply 
in virtue of the form. But, as we have noticed, truth often slips through 
these fetters, while those who employ them are left entrapped in them. 
Others are not so frequently entrapped and, as experience shows, the 
cleverest sophisms hardly ever deceive anyone who makes use of his 
untrammelled reason; rather, it is usually the sophists themselves who 
are led astray. 

Our principal concern here is thus to guard against our reason’s taking 
a holiday while we are investigating the truth about some issue; so we 
reject the forms of reasoning just described as being inimical to our 
project. Instead we search carefully for everything which may help our 
mind to stay alert, as we shall show below. But to make it even clearer 
that the aforementioned art of reasoning contributes nothing whatever to 
knowledge of the truth, we should realize that, on the basis of their 
method, dialecticians are unable to formulate a syllogism with a true 


1 See footnote, p. 12 above. 


Rule Eleven a7 


conclusion unless they are already in possession of the substance of the 
conclusion, i.e. unless they have previous knowledge of the very truth 
deduced in the syllogism. It is obvious therefore that they themselves can 
learn nothing new from such forms of reasoning, and hence that ordinary 
dialectic is of no use whatever to those who wish to investigate the truth 
of things. Its sole advantage is that it sometimes enables us to explain to 
others arguments which are already known. It should therefore be 
transferred from philosophy to rhetoric. 


Rule Eleven 


If, after intuiting a number of simple propositions, we deduce something 
else from them, it is useful to run through them in a continuous and 
completely uninterrupted train of thought, to reflect on their relations to 
one another, and to form a distinct and, as far as possible, simultaneous 
conception of several of them. For in this way our knowledge becomes 
much more certain, and our mental capacity is enormously increased. 


This is a good time to explain more clearly what was said about mental 
intuition in Rules Three and Seven. In one passage we contrasted it with 
deduction,! and in another only with enumeration,? which we defined as 
an inference drawn from many disconnected facts. But in the same 
passage we said that a simple deduction of one fact from another is 
performed by means of intuition. 

It was necessary to proceed in that way, because two things are 
required for mental intuition: first, the proposition intuited must be clear 
and distinct; second, the whole proposition must be understood all at 
once, and not bit by bit. But when we think of the process of deduction as 
we did in Rule Three, it does not seem to take place all at once: inferring 
one thing from another involves a kind of movement of our mind. In that 
passage, then, we were justified in distinguishing intuition from deduc- 
tion. But if we look on deduction as a completed process, as we did in 
Rule Seven, then it no longer signifies a movement but rather the 
completion of a movement. That is why we are supposing that the 
deduction is made through intuition when it is simple and transparent, 
but not when it is complex and involved. When the latter is the case, we 
call it ‘enumeration’ or ‘induction’, since the intellect cannot simul- 
taneously grasp it as a whole, and its certainty in a sense depends on 
memory, which must retain the judgements we have made on the 
individual parts of the enumeration if we are to derive a single conclu- 
sion from them taken as a whole. 


1 See above, p. 15. 2 See above, p. 25. 


407 


408 


38 Rules for the Direction of the Mind 


All these distinctions had to be made in order to make clear the 
meaning of this Rule. Rule Nine dealt only with mental intuition; Rule 
Ten only with enumeration. The present Rule explains the way in which 
these two operations aid and complement each other; they do this so 
thoroughly that they seem to coalesce into a single operation, through a 
movement of thought, as it were, which involves carefully intuiting one 
thing and passing on at once to the others. 

There is, we should point out, a twofold advantage in this fact: it 
facilitates a more certain knowledge of the conclusion in question, and it 
makes the mind better able to discover other truths. As we have said, 
conclusions which embrace more than we can grasp in a single intuition 
depend for their certainty on memory, and since memory is weak and 
unstable, it must be refreshed and strengthened through this continuous 
and repeated movement of thought. Say, for instance, in virtue of several 
operations, I have discovered the relation between the first and the 
second magnitude of a series, then the relation between the second and 

409 the third and the third and fourth, and lastly the fourth and fifth: that 
does not necessarily enable me to see what the relation is between the first 
and the fifth, and I cannot deduce it from the relations I already know 
unless I remember all of them. That is why it is necessary that I run over 
them again and again in my mind until I can pass from the first to the last 
so quickly that memory is left with practically no role to play, and I seem 
to be intuiting the whole thing at once. 

One cannot fail to see that in this way the sluggishness of the mind is 
redressed and its capacity even enlarged. But in addition we must note 
that the greatest advantage of this Rule lies in the fact that by reflecting 
on the mutual dependence of simple propositions we acquire the habit of 
distinguishing at a glance what is more, and what is less, relative, and by 
what steps the relative may be reduced to the absolute. For example, if I 
run through a number of magnitudes which are continued proportionals, 
I shall be struck by the following points. It is just as easy for me to 
recognize the relation between the first and the second magnitude, as 
between the second and the third, the third and fourth, etc., and the act 
of conceiving is exactly similar in each case. But it is more difficult for me 
to form a simultaneous conception of the relation of the second 
magnitude to the first and the third; and it is much more difficult still to 
conceive the way in which it depends on the first and fourth magnitudes, 
etc. These considerations enable me to understand why it is that, given 
only the first and second magnitudes, I can easily find the third and 
fourth, etc.: the reason is that the discovery is made by means of 
particular and distinct acts of conceiving. But if only the first and the 

410 third are given, it will not be so easy for me to discern the intermediate 


Rule Twelve 39 


magnitude, for this can be done only by means of an act of conceiving 
which simultaneously involves two of the acts just mentioned. If only the 
first and the fourth magnitudes are given, it is even more difficult to intuit 
the two intermediate ones, for in this case three acts of conceiving are 
simultaneously involved. So, as a logical consequence, it might seem even 
more difficult to find the three intermediate magnitudes given the first 
and fifth. Yet this is not the case, owing to a further reason, which is that, 
although four acts of conceiving are joined together in the present 
example, they can nevertheless be separated, since four is divisible by 
another number. So I can obtain the third magnitude alone on the basis 
of the first and the fifth, then the second on the basis of the first and 
the third, etc. If one is used to reflecting on these and similar matters, 
whenever one investigates a new problem one will immediately recognize 
the source of the difficulty and the simplest method for dealing with it. 
And that is the greatest aid to knowledge of the truth. 


Rule Twelve 


Finally we must make use of all the aids which intellect, imagination, 
sense-perception, and memory afford in order, firstly, to intuit simple 
propositions distinctly; secondly, to combine! correctly the matters under 
investigation with what we already know, so that they too may be 
known; and thirdly, to find out what things should be compared with 
each other so that we make the most thorough use of all our human 
powers. 


This Rule sums up everything that has been said above, and sets out a 
general lesson the details of which remain to be explained as follows. 

Where knowledge of things is concerned, only two factors need to be 
considered: ourselves, the knowing subjects, and the things which are the 
objects of knowledge. As for ourselves, there are only four faculties 
which we can use for this purpose, viz. intellect, imagination, sense- 
perception and memory. It is of course only the intellect that is capable of 
perceiving the truth, but it has to be assisted by imagination, sense- 
perception and memory if we are not to omit anything which lies within 
our power. As for the objects of knowledge, it is enough if we examine 
the following three questions: What presents itself to us spontaneously? 
How can one thing be known on the basis of something else? What 
conclusions can be drawn from each of these? This seems to me to be a 
complete enumeration and to omit nothing which is within the range of 
human endeavour. 

Turning now to the first factor, I should like to explain at this point 


1 Reading componenda, A; comparanda, H, ‘to compare’. 


411 


412 


413 


40 Rules for the Direction of the Mind 


what the human mind is, what the body is and how it is informed! by the 
mind, what faculties within the composite whole promote knowledge of 
things, and what each particular faculty does; but I lack the space, | 
think, to include all the points which have to be set out before the truth 
about these matters can be made clear to everyone. For my aim is always 
to write in such a way that I make no assertions on matters which are apt 
to give rise to controversy, without first setting out the reasons which led 
me to make them and which I think others may find convincing too. 

But since I cannot do that here, it will be sufficient if I explain as briefly 
as possible what, for my purposes, is the most useful way of conceiving 
everything within us which contributes to our knowledge of things. Of 
course you are not obliged to believe that things are as I suggest. But 
what is to prevent you from following these suppositions if it is obvious 
that they detract not a jot from the truth of things, but simply make 
everything much clearer? This is just what you do in geometry when you 
make certain assumptions about quantity, which in no way weaken the 
force of the demonstrations, even though in physics you often take a 
different view of the nature of quantity. 

Let us then conceive of the matter in the following way. First, in so far 
as our external senses are all parts of the body, sense-perception, strictly 
speaking, is merely passive, even though our application of the senses to 
objects involves action, viz. local motion; sense-perception occurs in the 
same way in which wax takes on an impression from a seal. It should not 
be thought that I have a mere analogy in mind here: we must think of the 
external shape of the sentient body as being really changed by the object 
in exactly the same way as the shape of the surface of the wax is altered 
by the seal. This is the case, we must admit, not only when we feel some 
body as having a shape, as being hard or rough to the touch etc., but also 
when we have a tactile perception of heat or cold and the like. The same 
is true of the other senses: thus, in the eye, the first opaque membrane 
receives the shape impressed upon it by multi-coloured light; and in the 
ears, the nose and the tongue, the first membrane which is impervious to 
the passage of the object thus takes on a new shape from the sound, the 
smell and the flavour respectively. 

This is a most helpful way of conceiving these matters, since nothing is 
more readily perceivable by the senses than shape, for it can be touched 
as well as seen. Moreover, the consequences of this supposition are no 
more false than those of any other. This is demonstrated by the fact that 
the concept of shape is so simple and common that it is involved in 
everything perceivable by the senses. Take colour, for example: whatever 
1 A scholastic term conveying the Aristotelian notion that the soul is the ‘form’ of the 


body. 


Rule Twelve 41 


you may suppose colour to be, you will not deny that it is extended and 
consequently has shape. So what troublesome consequences could there 
be if — while avoiding the useless assumption and pointless invention of 
some new entity, and without denying what others have preferred to 
think on the subject — we simply make an abstraction, setting aside every 
feature of colour apart from its possessing the character of shape, and 
conceive of the difference between white, blue, red, etc. as being like the 
difference between the following figures or similar ones? 


ill EB Be 


The same can be said about everything perceivable by the senses, since 
it is certain that the infinite multiplicity of figures is sufficient for the 
expression of all the differences in perceptible things. 

Secondly, when an external sense organ is stimulated by an object, the 
figure which it receives is conveyed at one and the same moment to 
another part of the body known as the ‘common’ sense,' without any 
entity really passing from the one to the other. In exactly the same way | 
understand that while I am writing, at the very moment when individual 
letters are traced on the paper, not only does the point of the pen move, 
but the slightest motion of this part cannot but be transmitted simul- 
taneously to the whole pen. All these various motions are traced out in 
the air by the tip of the quill, even though I do not conceive of anything 
real passing from one end to the other. Who then would think that the 
connection between the parts of the human body is less close than that 
between the parts of the pen? What simpler way of portraying the matter 
can be imagined? 

Thirdly, the ‘common’ sense functions like a seal, fashioning in the 
phantasy’ or imagination, as if in wax, the same figures or ideas which 
come, pure and without body, from the external senses. The phantasy is a 


1 An Aristotelian expression signifying an internal sense which receives and co-ordinates 
impressions from the five external senses. See De Anima, II, 1, 425714. 

2 Lat. phantasia, a term which for Descartes frequently means the same as imaginatio, 
though it is the term he prefers to use when speaking of the part of the brain in which the 
physical processes associated with imagining take place. When the latter use is clearly 
intended, the translation ‘corporeal imagination’ is adopted below. 


414 


415 


42 Rules for the Direction of the Mind 


genuine part of the body, and is large enough to allow different parts of it 
to take on many different figures and, generally, to retain them for some 
time; in which case it is to be identified with what we call ‘memory’. 
Fourthly, the motive power (i.e. the nerves themselves) has its origin in 
the brain, where the corporeal imagination is located; and the latter 
moves the nerves in different ways, just as the ‘common’ sense is moved 
by the external senses or the whole pen is moved by its lower end. This 
example also shows how the corporeal imagination can be the cause of 
many different movements in the nerves, even though it does not have 
images of these movements imprinted on it, but has certain other images 
which enable these movements to follow on. Again, the pen as a whole 
does not move in exactly the same way as its lower end; on the contrary, 
the upper part of the pen seems to have a quite different and opposite 
movement. This enables us to understand how all the movements of 
other animals can come about, even though we refuse to allow that they 
have any awareness of things, but merely grant them a purely corporeal 
imagination. It also enables us to understand how there occur within us 
all those operations which we perform without any help from reason. 
Fifthly, and lastly, the power through which we know things in the 
strict sense is purely spiritual, and is no less distinct from the whole body 
than blood is distinct from bone, or the hand from the eye. It is one single 
power, whether it receives figures from the ‘common’ sense at the same 
time as does the corporeal imagination, or applies itself to those which 
are preserved in the memory, or forms new ones which so preoccupy the 
imagination that it is often in no position to receive ideas from the 
‘common’ sense at the same time, or to transmit them to the power 
responsible for motion in accordance with a purely corporeal mode of 
operation. In all these functions the cognitive power is sometimes 
passive, sometimes active; sometimes resembling the seal, sometimes the 
wax. But this should be understood merely as an analogy, for nothing 
quite like this power is to be found in corporeal things. It is one and the 
same power: when applying itself along with imagination to the ‘com- 
mon’ sense, it is said to see, touch etc.; when addressing itself to the 
imagination alone, in so far as the latter is invested with various figures, 
it is said to remember; when applying itself to the imagination in order to 
form new figures, it is said to imagine or conceive; and lastly, when 
it acts on its own, it is said to understand. How understanding comes 
about I shall explain at greater length in the appropriate place. According 
to its different functions, then, the same power is called either pure 
intellect, or imagination, or memory, or sense-perception. But when it 
forms new ideas in the corporeal imagination, or concentrates on those 
already formed, the proper term for it is ‘native intelligence’. We are 


Rule Twelve 43 


regarding it as being capable of performing these different operations; 
and the distinction between these terms will have to be kept in mind in 
what follows. If all these matters are conceived along such lines, the 
attentive reader will have no difficulty in gathering what aids we should 
seek to obtain from each of these faculties and the lengths to which 
human endeavour can be stretched in supplementing the shortcomings of 
our native intelligence. 

The intellect can either be stimulated by the imagination or act upon it. 
Likewise the imagination can act upon the senses through the motive 
force, by directing them to objects, while the senses in their turn can act 
upon the imagination, by depicting the images of bodies upon it. But 
memory is no different from imagination — at least the memory which is 
corporeal and similar to the one which animals possess. So we can 
conclude with certainty that when the intellect is concerned with matters 
in which there is nothing corporeal or similar to the corporeal, it cannot 
receive any help from those faculties; on the contrary, if it is not to be 
hampered by them, the senses must be kept back and the imagination 
must, as far as possible, be divested of every distinct impression. If, 
however, the intellect proposes to examine something which can be 
referred to the body, the idea of that thing must be formed as distinctly as 
possible in the imagination. In order to do this properly, the thing itself 
which this idea is to represent should be displayed to the external senses. 
A plurality of things cannot be of assistance to the intellect in distinctly 
intuiting individual things. Rather, in order to deduce a single thing from 
a collection of things — a frequent task — we must discard from the ideas 
of the things whatever does not demand our present attention, so that the 
remaining features can be retained more readily in the memory. In the 
same way, it is not the things themselves which should be displayed to the 
external senses, but rather certain abbreviated representations of them; 
and the more compact these are, the handier they are, provided they act 
as adequate safeguards against lapses of memory. If we observe all these 
points, then I think we shall omit nothing which pertains to this part of 
the Rule. 

Let us now take up the second factor.' Our aim here is to distinguish 
carefully the notions of simple things from those which are composed of 
them, and in both cases to try to see where falsity can come in, so that we 
may guard against it, and to see what can be known with certainty, so 
that we may concern ourselves exclusively with that. To this end, as 
before, certain assumptions must be made in this context which perhaps 
not everyone will accept. But even if they are thought to be no more real 
than the imaginary circles which astronomers use to describe the 

1 I.e. the objects of knowledge. See above, p. 39. 


417 


418 


419 


44 Rules for the Direction of the Mind 


phenomena they study, this matters little, provided they help us to pick 
out the kind of apprehension of any given thing that may be true and to 
distinguish it from the kind that may be false. 

We state our view, then, in the following way. First, when we consider 
things in the order that corresponds to our knowledge of them, our view 
of them must be different from what it would be if we were speaking of 
them in accordance with how they exist in reality. If, for example, we 
consider some body which has extension and shape, we shall indeed 
admit that, with respect to the thing itself, it is one single and simple 
entity. For, viewed in that way, it cannot be said to be a composite made 
up of corporeal nature, extension and shape, since these constituents 
have never existed in isolation from each other. Yet with respect to our 
intellect we call it a composite made up of these three natures, because we 
understood each of them separately before we were in a position to judge 
that the three of them are encountered at the same time in one and the 
same subject. That is why, since we are concerned here with things only in 
so far as they are perceived by the intellect, we term ‘simple’ only those 
things which we know so clearly and distinctly that they cannot be 
divided by the mind into others which are more distinctly known. Shape, 
extension and motion, etc. are of this sort; all the rest we conceive to be 
in a sense composed out of these. This point is to be taken in a very 
general sense, so that not even the things that we occasionally abstract 
from these simples are exceptions to it. We are abstracting, for example, 
when we say that shape is the limit of an extended thing, conceiving by 
the term ‘limit’ something more general than shape, since we can talk of 
the limit of a duration, the limit of a motion, etc. But, even if the sense of 
the term ‘limit’ is derived by abstraction from the notion of shape, that is 
no reason to regard it as simpler than shape. On the contrary, since the 
term ‘limit’ is also applied to other things — such as the limit of a duration 
or a motion, etc., things totally different in kind from shape — it must 
have been abstracted from these as well. Hence, it is something com- 
pounded out of many quite different natures, and the term ‘limit’ does 
not have a univocal application in all these cases. 

Secondly, those things which are said to be simple with respect to our 
intellect are, on our view, either purely intellectual or purely material, or 
common to both. Those simple natures which the intellect recognizes by 
means of a sort of innate light, without the aid of any corporeal image, 
are purely intellectual. That there is a number of such things is certain: it 
is impossible to form any corporeal idea which represents for us what 
knowledge or doubt or ignorance is, or the action of the will, which may 
be called ‘volition’, and the like; and yet we have real knowledge of all of 
these, knowledge so easy that in order to possess it all we need is some 


Rule Twelve 45 


degree of rationality. Those simple natures, on the other hand, which are 
recognized to be present only in bodies — such as shape, extension and 
motion, etc. — are purely material. Lastly, those simples are to be termed 
‘common’ which are ascribed indifferently, now to corporeal things, now 
to spirits — for instance, existence, unity, duration and the like. To this 
class we must also refer those common notions which are, as it were, 
links which connect other simple natures together, and whose self- 
evidence is the basis for all the rational inferences we make. Examples of 
these are: ‘Things that are the same as a third thing are the same as each 
other’; ‘Things that cannot be related in the same way to a third thing are 
different in some respect.’ These common notions can be known either by 
the pure intellect or by the intellect as it intuits the images of material 
things. 

Moreover, it is as well to count among the simple natures the 
corresponding privations and negations, in so far as we understand these. 
For when I intuit what nothing is, or an instant, or rest, my apprehension 
is as much genuine knowledge as my understanding what existence is, or 
duration, or motion. This way of conceiving things will be helpful later 
on in enabling us to say that all the rest of what we know is put together 
out of these simple natures. Thus, if I judge that a certain shape is not 
moving, I shall say that my thought is in some way composed of shape 
and rest; and similarly in other cases. 

Thirdly, these simple natures are all self-evident and never contain any 
falsity. This can easily be shown if we distinguish between the faculty by 
which our intellect intuits and knows things and the faculty by which it 
makes affirmative or negative judgements. For it can happen that we 
think we are ignorant of things we really know, as for example when we 
suspect that they contain something else which eludes us, something 
beyond what we intuit or reach in our thinking, even though we are 
mistaken in thinking this. For this reason, it is evident that we are 
mistaken if we ever judge that we lack complete knowledge of any one of 
these simple natures. For if we have even the slightest grasp of it in our 
mind — which we surely must have, on the assumption that we are 
making a judgement about it — it must follow that we have complete 
knowledge of it. Otherwise it could not be said to be simple, but a 
composite made up of that which we perceive in it and that of which we 
judge we are ignorant. 

Fourthly, the conjunction between these simple things is either neces- 
sary or contingent. The conjunction is necessary when one of them is 
somehow implied (albeit confusedly) in the concept of the other so that 
we cannot conceive either of them distinctly if we judge them to be 
separate from each other. It is in this way that shape is conjoined with 


420 


421 


422 


46 Rules for the Direction of the Mind 


extension, motion with duration or time, etc., because we cannot 
conceive of a shape which is completely lacking in extension, or a motion 
wholly lacking in duration. Similarly, if I say that 4 and 3 make 7, the 
composition is a necessary one, for we do not have a distinct conception 
of the number 7 unless in a confused sort of way we include 3 and 4 in it. 
In the same way, whatever we demonstrate concerning figures or 
numbers necessarily links up with that of which it is affirmed. This 
necessity applies not just to things which are perceivable by the senses but 
to others as well. If, for example, Socrates says that he doubts everything, 
it necessarily follows that he understands at least that he is doubting, and 
hence that he knows that something can be true or false, etc.; for there is 
a necessary connection between these facts and the nature of doubt. The 
union between such things, however, is contingent when the relation 
conjoining them is not an inseparable one. This is the case when we say 
that a body is animate, that a man is dressed, etc. Again, there are many 
instances of things which are necessarily conjoined, even though most 
people count them as contingent, failing to notice the relation between 
them: for example the proposition, ‘I am, therefore God exists’, or ‘I 
understand, therefore I have a mind distinct from my body.’ Finally, we 
must note that very many necessary propositions, when converted, are 
contingent. Thus from the fact that I exist I may conclude with certainty 
that God exists, but from the fact that God exists I cannot legitimately 
assert that I too exist. 

Fifthly, it is not possible for us ever to understand anything beyond 
those simple natures and a certain mixture or compounding of one with 
another. Indeed, it is often easier to attend at once to several mutually 
conjoined natures than to separate one of them from the others. For 
example, I can have knowledge of a triangle, even though it has never 
occurred to me that this knowledge involves knowledge also of the angle, 
the line, the number three, shape, extension, etc. But that does not 
preclude our saying that the nature of a triangle is composed of these 
other natures and that they are better known than the triangle, for it is 
just these natures that we understand to be present in it. Perhaps there are 
many additional natures implicitly contained in the triangle which escape 
Our notice, such as the size of the angles being equal to two right angles, 
the innumerable relations between the sides and the angles, the size of its 
surface area, etc. 

Sixthly, those natures which we call ‘composite’ are known by us 
either because we learn from experience what sort they are, or because 
we ourselves put them together. Our experience consists of whatever we 
perceive by means of the senses, whatever we learn from others, and in 
general whatever reaches our intellect either from external sources or 


Rule Twelve 47 


from its own reflexive self-contemplation. We should note here that the 
intellect can never be deceived by any experience, provided that when the 
object is presented to it, it intuits it in a fashion exactly corresponding to 
the way in which it possesses the object, either within itself or in the 
imagination. Furthermore, it must not judge that the imagination 
faithfully represents the objects of the senses, or that the senses take on 
the true shapes of things, or in short that external things always are just 
as they appear to be. In all such cases we are liable to go wrong, as we do 
for example when we take as gospel truth a story which someone has told 
us; Or as someone who has jaundice does when, owing to the yellow tinge 
of his eyes, he thinks everything is coloured yellow; or again, as we do 
when our imagination is impaired (as it is in depression) and we think 
that its disordered images represent real things. But the understanding of 
the wise man will not be deceived in such cases: while he will judge that 
whatever comes to him from his imagination really is depicted in it, he 
will never assert that it passes, complete and unaltered, from the external 
world to his senses, and from his senses to the corporeal imagination, 
unless he already has some other grounds for claiming to know this. But 
whenever we believe that an object of our understanding contains 
something of which the mind has no immediate perceptual experience, 
then it is we ourselves who are responsible for its composition. In the 
same way, when someone who has jaundice is convinced that the things 
he sees are yellow, this thought of his will be composite, consisting partly 
of what his corporeal imagination represents to him and partly of the 
assumption he is making on his own account, viz. that the colour looks 
yellow not owing to any defect of vision but because the things he sees 
really are yellow. It follows from this that we can go wrong only when 
we ourselves compose in some way the objects of our belief. 

Seventhly, this composition can come about in three ways: through 
impulse, through conjecture or through deduction. It is a case of 
composition through impulse when, in forming judgements about things, 
our mind leads us to believe something, not because good reasons 
convince us of it, but simply because we are caused to believe it, either by 
some superior power, or by our free will, or by a disposition of the 
corporeal imagination. The first cause is never a source of error, the 
second rarely, the third almost always; but the first of these is irrelevant 
in this context, since it does not come within the scope of method. An 
example of composition by way of conjecture would be our surmising 
that above the air there is nothing but a very pure ether, much thinner 
than air, on the grounds that water, being further from the centre of the 
globe than earth, is a thinner substance than earth, and air, which rises to 
greater heights than water, is thinner still. Nothing that we put together 


423 


424 


425 


426 


48 Rules for the Direction of the Mind 


in this way really deceives us, so long as we judge it to be merely 
probable, and never assert it to be true; nor for that matter does it make 
us any the wiser.! 

Deduction, therefore, remains as our sole means of compounding 
things in a way that enables us to be certain of their truth. Yet even with 
deduction there can be many drawbacks. If, say, we conclude that a given 
space full of air is empty, on the grounds that we do not perceive 
anything in it, either by sight, touch, or any other sense, then we are 
incorrectly conjoining the nature of a vacuum with the nature of this 
space. This is just what happens when we judge that we can deduce 
something general and necessary from something particular and contin- 
gent. But it is within our power to avoid this error, viz. by never 
conjoining things unless we intuit that the conjunction of one with the 
other is wholly necessary, as we do for example when we deduce that 
nothing which lacks extension can have a shape, on the grounds that 
there is a necessary connection between shape and extension, and so on. 

From all these considerations we may draw several conclusions. First, 
we have explained distinctly and, I think, by an adequate enumeration, 
what at the outset we were able to present only in a confused and 
rough-and-ready way, viz. that there are no paths to certain knowledge 
of the truth accessible to men save manifest intuition and necessary 
deduction. We have also explained what the simple natures are which 
were mentioned in Rule Eight. It is clear that mental intuition extends to 
all these simple natures and to our knowledge of the necessary connec- 
tions between them, and in short to everything else which the intellect 
finds to be present exactly within itself or in the corporeal imagination. 
But I shall have more to say about deduction below.’ 

Second, we need take no great pains to discover these simple natures, 
because they are self-evident enough. What requires effort is distin- 
guishing one from another, and intuiting each one separately with 
steadfast mental gaze. There is no one so dull-witted that he fails to 
perceive that when sitting he is to some extent different from what he is 
when standing; but it is not everyone who can distinguish just as 
distinctly the nature of posture from the other notions which this thought 
contains, or who can assert that it is only the posture which alters in these 
two cases. There is good reason for our urging this point here, because 
the learned are often inclined to be so clever that they find ways of 
blinding themselves even to facts which are self-evident and which every 
peasant knows. This is what happens whenever they try and explain 


1 Following Crapulli’s reading of A and H, non facit (‘does not make’). AT read nos facit 
(‘makes us’) without giving any variant reading. 
2 See point eight below, p. 50. 


Rule Twelve 49 


things which are self-evident in terms of something even more evident: 
what they do is to explain something else or nothing at all. For example, 
can anyone fail to perceive all the respects in which change occurs! when 
we change our place? And when told that ‘place is the surface of the 
surrounding body’, would anyone conceive of the matter in the same 
way? For the surface of the ‘surrounding body’ can change, even though I 
do not move or change my place; conversely, it may move along with me, 
so that, although it still surrounds me, I am no longer in the same place. 
Again, when people say that motion, something perfectly familiar to 
everyone, is ‘the actuality of a potential being, in so far as it is poten- 
tial’,> do they not give the impression of uttering magic words which 
have a hidden meaning beyond the grasp of the human mind? For 
who can understand these expressions? Who does not know what 
motion is? Who would deny that these people are finding a difficulty 
where none exists? It must be said, then, that we should never explain 
things of this sort by definitions,* in case we take hold of composite 
things instead of simple ones. Rather, each of us, according to the light of 
his own mind, must attentively intuit only those things which are 
distinguished from all others. 

Third, the whole of human knowledge® consists uniquely in our 
achieving a distinct perception of how all these simple natures contribute 
to the composition of other things. This is a very useful point to note, 
since whenever some difficulty is proposed for investigation, almost 
everyone gets stuck right at the outset, uncertain as to which thoughts he 
ought to concentrate his mind on, yet quite convinced that he ought to 
seek some new kind of entity previously unknown to him. Thus, if the 
question concerns the nature of the magnet, foreseeing that the topic will 
prove inaccessible and difficult, he turns his mind away from everything 
that is evident, and immediately directs it at all the most difficult points, 
in the vague expectation that by rambling through the barren field of 
manifold causes he will hit upon something new. But take someone who 
thinks that nothing in the magnet can be known which does not consist 
of certain self-evident, simple natures: he is in no doubt about how he 
should proceed. First he carefully gathers together all the available 
observations® concerning the stone in question; then he tries to deduce 
from this what sort of mixture of simple natures is necessary for 
producing all the effects which the magnet is found to have. Once he has 
1 Reading immutatur, A, H (following Crapulli). AT adopt Leibniz’s emendation, 

immutamur (‘we change’). 

2 Cf. Aristotle, Physics, Iv, 4, 21235. 3 Cf. Aristotle, Physics, 11, 1, 201710. 
4 Cf. Principles, Part 1, art. 10, p. 195 below. 


5 Lat. scientia; see footnote on p. 10 above. 
6 Lat. experimenta; see footnote on the equivalent French term expériences, p. 143 below. 


427 


428 


429 


50 Rules for the Direction of the Mind 


discovered this mixture, he is in a position to make the bold claim that he 
has grasped the true nature of the magnet, so far as it is humanly possible 
to discover it on the basis of given observations. 

Lastly, from what has been said it follows that we should not regard 
some branches of our knowledge of things as more obscure than others, 
since they are all of the same nature and consist simply in the putting 
together of self-evident facts. Very few people are aware of this point. 
Prepossessed by the opposite view, the more confident among them do 
not hesitate to proclaim their own conjectures as true demonstrations: in 
matters about which they are completely ignorant they pronounce that 
they see, as if through a cloud, truths which are often obscure; and they 
have no qualms about making such claims. They tie their concepts up in 
various technical terms and, fortified with these, are inclined to discuss, 
coherently enough, many matters which neither they themselves nor their 
listeners really understand. But the more modest among them often 
refrain from investigating many matters — even though they are not 
difficult and are quite essential for life — simply because they deem 
themselves unequal to the task. And since they think that such matters 
can best be understood by others who are more intellectually gifted, 
they embrace the views of those in whose authority they have more 
confidence. 

Eighthly,! deduction can only proceed from words to things, from 
effects to causes or from causes to effects, from like to like, from parts to 
parts or to the whole .. .” 

For the rest, in case anyone should fail to see the interconnection 
between our Rules, we divide everything that can be known into simple 
propositions and problems. As for simple propositions, the only rules we 
provide are those which prepare our cognitive powers for a more distinct 
intuition of any given object and for a more discerning examination of it. 
For these simple propositions must occur to us spontaneously; they 
cannot be sought out. We have covered simple propositions in the 
preceding twelve Rules, and everything that might in any way facilitate 
the exercise of reason has, we think, been presented in them. As for 
problems, however, some can be understood perfectly, even though we 
do not know the solutions to them, while others are not perfectly 
understood. We shall deal solely with the former sort of problems in the 
following twelve Rules, and shall postpone discussion of the latter until 
1 Reading octavo A, following Crapulli. The variant, sto, in H is a misreading of 8to. This 

is the eighth ‘assumption’, following on naturally from the seventh (p. 47 above). 

Conclusions one to four (pp. 48ff) are a long digression between ‘assumptions’ seven and 


eight. 
2 There is a lacuna in the texts of A and H at this point. The topic is taken up again below, 


pp. 53f. 


Rule Thirteen 51 


the final set of twelve Rules.! The division between perfectly understood 
and imperfectly understood problems is one that we have introduced 
quite deliberately: its purpose is partly to save us from having to mention 
anything which presupposes an acquaintance with what follows, and 
partly to enable us to set forth first those matters which in our view have 
to be tackled first if we are to cultivate our mental powers. We must note 
that a problem is to be counted as perfectly understood only if we have a 
distinct perception of the following three points: first, what the criteria 
are which enable us to recognize what we are looking for when we come 
upon it; second, what exactly is the basis from which we ought to deduce 
it; third, how it is to be proved that the two are so mutually dependent 
that the one cannot alter in any respect without there being a correspond- 
ing alteration in the other. So now that we possess all the premisses, the 
only thing that remains to be shown is how the conclusion is to be found. 
This is not a matter of drawing a single deduction from a single, simple 
fact, for, as we have already pointed out, that can be done without the 
aid of rules; it is, rather, a matter of deriving a single fact which depends 
on many interconnected facts, and of doing this in such a methodical way 
that no greater intellectual capacity is required than is needed for the 
simplest inference. Problems of this sort are for the most part abstract, 
and arise almost exclusively in arithmetic and geometry, which is why 
they will seem to ignorant people to be of little use. But those who desire 
a perfect mastery of the latter part of my method (which deals with the 
other sort of problem) should be advised that a long period of study and 
practice is needed in order to acquire this technique. 


Rule Thirteen 


If we perfectly understand a problem we must abstract it from every 
superfluous conception, reduce it to its simplest terms and, by means of 
an enumeration, divide it up into the smallest possible parts. 


This is the sole respect in which we imitate the dialecticians: when they 
expound the forms of the syllogisms, they presuppose that the terms or 
subject-matter of the syllogisms are known; similarly, we are making it a 
prerequisite here that the problem under investigation is perfectly 
understood. But we do not distinguish, as they do, a middle term and two 
extreme terms.” We view the whole matter in the following way. First, in 
every problem there must be something unknown; otherwise there would 


1 The final set of twelve Rules was not completed. See Translator’s preface, p. 7 above. 

2 The middle term of a categorical syllogism is the term which occurs in both premisses but 
not in the conclusion; the extreme terms are the two terms each of which occurs in one 
premiss only, and which are connected in the conclusion. 


430 


431 


432 


52 Rules for the Direction of the Mind 


be no point in posing the problem. Secondly, this unknown something 
must be delineated in some way, otherwise there would be nothing to 
point us to one line of investigation as opposed to any other. Thirdly, 
the unknown something can be delineated only by way of something else 
which is already known. These conditions hold also for imperfect 
problems. If, for example, the problem concerns the nature of the 
magnet, we already understand what is meant by the words ‘magnet’ and 
‘nature’, and it is this knowledge which determines us to adopt one line 
of inquiry rather than another, etc. But if the problem is to be perfect, we 
want it to be determinate in every respect, so that we are not looking for 
anything beyond what can be deduced from the data. For example, 
someone may ask me what conclusions are to be drawn about the nature 
of the magnet simply from the experiments which Gilbert claims to have 
performed, be they true or false.! Or again I may be asked to determine 
what the nature of sound is, solely and precisely from the following data: 
three strings, A, B and C emit the same sound; B is twice as thick as A, 
but no longer, and is tensioned by a weight which is twice as heavy: C is 
twice as long as A, though not so thick, and is tensioned by a weight four 
times as heavy. It is easy to see from such examples how imperfect 
problems can all be reduced to perfect ones — as I shall explain at greater 
length in the appropriate place.* We can also see how, by following this 
Rule, we can abstract a problem which is well understood from every 
irrelevant conception and reduce it to such a form that we are no longer 
aware of dealing with this or that subject-matter but only with certain 
magnitudes in general and the comparison between them.’ For example, 
once we have decided to investigate specific observations relating solely 
to the magnet, we no longer have any difficulty in dismissing all other 
observations from our mind. 

Furthermore, the problem should be reduced to the simplest terms 
according to Rules Five and Six, and it should be divided up according to 
Rule Seven. Thus if I carry out many observations in my research on the 
magnet, I shall run through them separately one after another. Again, if 
the subject of my research is sound, as in the case above, | shall make 
separate comparisons between strings A and B, then between A and C, 
etc., with a view to including all of them together in a sufficient 
enumeration. With respect to the terms of a given problem, these three 
points are the only ones which the pure intellect has to observe before 
embarking on the final solution of the problem, for which the following 


1 William Gilbert, the English physicist (1540-1603), author of De Magnete (1600). 
2 Descartes did not complete this task. 
3 Reading comparandas, H (componendas, A, ‘composition’). 


Rule Thirteen 53 


eleven Rules may be required. How this is to be done will be made clearer 
in the third part of the treatise. By ‘problems’, moreover, we mean 
everything in which there lies truth or falsity. We must enumerate the 
different kinds of problems, so that we may determine what we have the 
power to achieve in each kind. 

As we have already said, there can be no falsity in the mere intuition of 
things, be they simple or conjoined. In that respect they are not called 
‘problems’; but they acquire that name as soon as we decide to make a 
definite judgement about them. Indeed, it is not just the puzzles which 
others set that we count as problems. Socrates posed a problem about his 
own ignorance, or rather doubt: when he became aware of his doubt, he 
began to ask whether it was true that he was in doubt about everything, 
and his answer was affirmative. 

Now, we are seeking to derive things from words, or causes from 
effects, or effects from causes, or a whole from parts or parts from other 
parts, or several of these at once. 

We say that we are seeking to derive things from words whenever the 
difficulty lies in the obscurity of the language employed. Riddles all 
belong to this class of problem: for example the riddle of the Sphinx 
about the animal which is four-footed to begin with, then two-footed, 
and later on becomes three-footed; or the one about the anglers standing 
on the shore with rod and line, maintaining that they no longer have the 
ones they caught but do have those which they have not yet managed to 
catch, etc.! Moreover, in the vast majority of issues about which the 
learned dispute, the problem is almost always one of words. There is no 
need, however, to have such a low opinion of great minds as to think that 
they have a wrong conception of the things themselves when they fail to 
explain them in terms which are quite appropriate. When, for example, 
they define place as ‘the surface of the surrounding body’, they are not 
really conceiving anything false, but are merely misusing the word 
‘place’, which in its ordinary use denotes the simple and self-evident 
nature in virtue of which something is said to be here or there. This 
nature consists entirely in a certain relation between the thing said to be 
at the place and the parts of extended? space. Some, seeing that the term 
‘place’ has been used to denote the surrounding surface, have improperly 
called this nature ‘intrinsic place’,? and the same goes for other cases of 


1 See below, p. 55. 

2 Lat. extensi, A, H. AT unnecessarily emend to exterioris (‘exterior’); Crapulli emends to 
externi (‘external’). 

3 In scholastic physics ‘intrinsic’ place is the space which a body occupies. Cf. Principles, 
pp. 227f below. 


433 


434 


435 


54 Rules for the Direction of the Mind 


this sort. These questions about words arise so frequently that, if 
philosophers always agreed about the meanings of words, their con- 
troversies would almost all be at an end. 

It is a problem of deriving causes from effects when in our investigation 
into something we ask whether it exists, or what it is .. .! 

Moreover, when we are given a problem to solve, we are often unable 
to recognize immediately what sort of problem it is, and whether it is a 
matter of deriving things from words, or causes from effects, etc. Hence it 
would, I think, be quite pointless to give a lengthy account of the 
different kinds of problem. It will be less time-consuming and more 
convenient if instead we make a general and orderly survey of all the 
points which have to be covered in the solution of any difficulty 
whatever. Accordingly, no matter what the problem is, we must above all 
strive to understand distinctly what is being sought. 

Frequently people are in such a hurry in their investigation of problems 
that they set about solving them with their minds blank — without first 
taking account of the criteria which will enable them to recognize 
distinctly the thing they are seeking, should they come across it. They are 
thus behaving like a foolish servant who, sent on some errand by his 
master, is so eager to obey that he dashes off without instructions and 
without knowing where he is to go. 

In every problem, of course, there has to be something unknown — 
otherwise the inquiry would be pointless. Nevertheless this unknown 
something must be delineated by definite conditions, which point us 
decidedly in one direction of inquiry rather than another. These condi- 
tions should, in our view, be gone into right from the very outset. We 
shall do this if we concentrate our mind’s eye on intuiting each individual 
condition distinctly, looking carefully to see to what extent each condi- 
tion delimits the unknown object of our inquiry. For in this context the 
human mind is liable to go wrong in one or other of two ways: it may 
assume something beyond the data required to define the problem, or on 
the other hand it may leave something out. 

We must take care not to assume more than the data, and not to take 
the data in too narrow a sense. This is especially true in the case of riddles 
and other enigmas ingeniously contrived to tax our wits. But it applies 
sometimes to other problems as well, as for example, when for the sake 
of a solution we apparently take something as if it were certain, although 


1 A lacuna in the texts of A and H. The lost matter is perhaps partially reproduced by 
Arnauld in the second edition of his Logic (the ‘Port-Royal Logic’), an extract from 
which is given in the Appendix below, p. 77. 


Rule Thirteen 55 


our confidence in it is due more to ingrained prejudice than to any certain 
reason. In the riddle of the Sphinx, for example, there is no need to think 
that the word ‘footed’ refers exclusively to real feet — to animals’ feet. 
Rather, we should try and see whether it can be applied figuratively to 
other things as well, as it sometimes is to a baby’s hands or an old man’s 
walking-stick, since these are both used, like feet, for getting about. 
Likewise, in the conundrum about the anglers, we must try not to let the 
thought of fish so preoccupy our minds that it distracts us from thinking 
of those tiny creatures which the poor often unwillingly carry about their 
person and throw away when caught. Again, the question may concern 
the way in which a certain vessel is constructed, such as the bowl we once 
saw, which had a column in the centre of it, on top of which was a figure 
of Tantalus looking as if he was longing to have a drink: water which 
was poured into the bowl remained within it, as long as the level was 
below Tantalus’ mouth; but as soon as the water reached the unfortunate 
man’s lips, it all ran out. At first glance it might seem that the artistry here 
lay entirely in the construction of the figure of Tantalus, when in fact that 
is merely a coincidental feature and by no means a factor which defines 
the problem. The whole difficulty is this: how must the bowl be 
constructed if it lets out all the water as soon as, but not before, it reaches 
a fixed height? One last example: say the question is, ‘What can we assert 
about the motion of the stars, given all the observational data we have 
relating to them?’ In this case we must not freely assume, as the ancients 
did, that the earth is motionless and fixed at the centre of the universe, 
just because from our infancy that is how it appeared to us to be. That 
assumption should be called in doubt so that we may then consider what 
in the way of certainty our judgement may attain on this matter. And the 
same goes for other cases of this sort. 

On the other hand it is a sin of omission when we fail to take account 
of some condition necessary for defining a problem, a factor which is 
either explicitly stated in it or is in some way implied by it. Consider for 
example the question of perpetual motion — not the natural variety 
present in the stars and in springs, but the man-made variety. Some have 
believed that it is possible to achieve perpetual motion of this sort. 
Regarding the earth as being in perpetual circular motion about its own 
axis, and the magnet as having all the properties of the earth, they think 
that they could invent perpetual motion if they could set up a lodestone 
to move in a circle or at least get it to transfer its motion, along with its 
other powers, to a piece of iron. Yet even if this were done, what they 
produced would not be artificial perpetual motion; it would simply be a 
natural motion which they had harnessed, and would be no different 
from the continuous motion produced by placing a wheel in a mill-race. 


436 


437 


438 


56 Rules for the Direction of the Mind 


They would therefore be failing to take notice of a condition which is 
essential for defining the problem, etc.! 

Once we have sufficiently understood the problem, we should try and 
see exactly where the difficulty lies, so that by abstracting it from 
everything else, the problem may be the more easily solved. 

In order to find out where the difficulty lies, it is not always sufficient 
simply to understand the problem; we must also give thought to the 
particular factors which are essential to it. If any considerations should 
occur to us which are easy to discover, we shall put these aside; and once 
these have been eliminated, what we are left with will be just the point we 
are looking for. Thus in the case described above, it is easy to see how the 
bowl must be constructed. Once we have set aside, as irrelevant to the 
issue, such features as the column in the middle, the picture of the bird, 
etc., the problem is laid bare, which is to explain why it is that all the 
water flows out of the bowl when it reaches a certain level. 

The only thing worth doing, then, in our view is to scrutinize in due 
order all the factors given in the problem at hand, to dismiss those which 
we plainly see are irrelevant to the issue, to hold onto those which are 
essential, and to submit the doubtful ones to a more careful examination. 


Rule Fourteen 


The pro should be re-expressed in terms of the real extension of 
bodies and Id be pictured in our imagination entirely by means of 
bare figures. Thus it will be perceived much more distinctly by our 


intellect. 


If, moreover, we are to make use of the imagination as an aid we should 
note that whenever we deduce something unknown from something 
already known, it does not follow that we are discovering some new kind 
of entity, but merely that we are extending our entire knowledge of the 
topic in question to the point where we perceive that the thing we are 
looking for participates in this way or that way in the nature of the things 
given in the statement of the problem. For example, if someone is blind 
from birth, we should not expect to be able by force of argument to get 
him to have true ideas of colours just like the ones we have, derived as 
they are from the senses. But if someone at some time has seen the 
primary colours, though not the secondary or mixed colours, then by 


1 This passage follows the text of A. The text of AT is based on H, and contains several 
minor emendations. 


Rule Fourteen 57 


means of a deduction of sorts it is possible for him to form images even of 
those he has not seen, in virtue of their similarity to those he has seen.! In 
the same way, if the magnet contains some kind of entity the like of 
which our intellect has never before perceived, it is pointless to hope that 
we shall ever get to know it simply by reasoning; in order to do that, we 
should need to be endowed with some new sense, or with a divine mind. 
But if we perceive very distinctly that combination of familiar entities or 
natures which produces the same effects which appear in the magnet, 
then we shall credit ourselves with having achieved whatever it is possible 
for the human mind to attain in this matter. 

Indeed, it is by means of one and the same idea that we recognize in 
different subjects? each of these familiar entities, such as extension, 
shape, motion and the like (which we need not enumerate here). The 
question whether a crown is made‘of silver or of gold makes no difference 
to the way we imagine its shape. This common idea is carried over from 
one subject to the other solely by means of a simple comparison, which 
enables us to state that the thing we are seeking is in this or that respect 
similar to, or identical with, or equal to, some given thing. Accordingly, 
in all reasoning it is only by means of comparison that we attain an exact 
knowledge of the truth. Consider, for example, the inference: all A is B, 
all B is C, therefore all A is C. In this case the thing sought and the thing 
given, A and C, are compared with respect to their both being B, etc. But, 
as we have frequently insisted,’ the syllogistic forms are of no help in 
grasping the truth of things. So it will be to the reader’s advantage to 
reject them altogether and to think of all knowledge whatever — save 
knowledge obtained through simple and pure intuition of a single, 
solitary thing — as resulting from a comparison between two or more 
things. In fact the business of human reason consists almost entirely in 
preparing for this operation. For when the operation is straightforward 
and simple, we have no need of a technique to help us intuit the truth 
which the comparison yields; all we need is the light of nature. 

We should note that comparisons are said to be simple and straight- 
forward only when the thing sought and the initial data participate 
equally in a certain nature. The reason why preparation is required for 
other sorts of comparison is simply that the common nature in question 
is not present equally in both, but only by way of other relations or 


1 H contains the note (in the margin), ‘This example is not absolutely true, but I did not 
have a better one for explicating what is true.’ 

2. I.e. subjects of which attributes are predicated — the sense which ‘subject’ generally bears 
in the Rules. 

3 See above, pp. 12, 16, 36. 


439 


440 


441 


442 


58 Rules for the Direction of the Mind 


proportions which imply it. The chief part of human endeavour is simply 
to reduce these proportions to the point where an equality between what 
we are seeking and what we already know is clearly visible. 

We should note, moreover, that nothing can be reduced to such an 
equality except what admits of differences of degree, and everything 
covered by the term ‘magnitude’. Consequently, when the terms of a 
problem have been abstracted from every subject in accordancé with the 
preceding Rule, then we understand that all we have to deal with here are 
magnitudes in general. 

The final point to note is this: if we are to imagine something, and are 
to make use, not of the pure intellect, but of the intellect aided by images 
depicted in the imagination, then nothing can be ascribed to magnitudes 
in general which cannot also be ascribed to any species of magnitude. 

It is easy to conclude from this that it will be very useful if we transfer 
what we understand to hold for magnitudes in general to that species of 
magnitude which is most readily and distinctly depicted in our imagina- 
tion. But it follows from what we said in Rule Twelve! that this species is 
the real extension of a body considered in abstraction from everything 
else about it save its having a shape. In that Rule we conceived of the 
imagination, along with the ideas existing in it, as being nothing 
but a real body with a real extension and shape. That indeed is 
self-evident, since no other subject displays more distinctly all the various 
differences in proportions. One thing can of course be said to be more or 
less white than another, one sound more or less sharp than another, and 
so on; but we cannot determine exactly whether the greater exceeds the 
lesser by a ratio of 2 to 1 or 3 to 1 unless we have recourse to a certain 
analogy with the extension of a body that has shape. Let us then take it as 
firmly settled that perfectly determinate problems present hardly any 
difficulty at all, save that of expressing proportions in the form of 
equalities, and also that everything in which we encounter just this 
difficulty can easily be, and ought to be, separated from every other 
subject and then expressed in terms of extension and figures. According- 
ly, we shall dismiss everything else from our thoughts and deal exclusive- 
ly with these until we reach Rule Twenty-five. 

At this point we should be delighted to come upon a reader favourably 
disposed towards arithmetic and geometry, though I would rather that he 
had not yet embarked upon these studies than that he had been taught 
them in the usual manner. For the Rules which I am about to expound 
are much more readily employed in the study of these sciences (where 
they are all that is needed) than in any other sort of problem. Moreover, 


1 See above, pp. 4of, 43. 


Rule Fourteen 59 


these Rules are so useful in the pursuit of deeper wisdom that I have no 
hesitation in saying that this part of our method was designed not just for 
the sake of mathematical problems; our intention was, rather, that the 
mathematical problems should be studied almost exclusively for the sake 
of the excellent practice which they give us in the method. I shall not 
assume anything drawn from the aforementioned disciplines, save 
perhaps certain facts which are self-evident and accessible to everyone. 
But the usual sort of knowledge of these subjects which others have, even 
if not vitiated by any glaring errors, is nevertheless obscured by many 
vague and ill-conceived principles, which from time to time we shall 
endeavour to correct in the following pages. 

By ‘extension’ we mean whatever has length, breadth and depth, 
leaving aside the question whether it is a real body or merely a space. 
This notion does not, I think, need any further elucidation, for there is 
nothing more easily perceived by our imagination. Of course the learned 
often employ distinctions so subtle that they disperse the natural light, 
and they detect obscurities even in matters which are perfectly clear to 
peasants. So we must point out to such people that by the term 
‘extension’ we do not mean here something distinct and separate from 
the subject itself, and that we generally do not recognize philosophical 
entities of the sort that are not genuinely imaginable. For although 
someone may convince himself that it is not self-contradictory for 
extension per se to exist all on its own even if everything extended in the 
universe were annihilated, he would not be employing a corporeal idea in 
conceiving this, but merely an incorrect judgement of the intellect alone. 
He will admit this himself if he carefully reflects on the image of 
extension which he tries to form in his imagination. He will realize that 
he does not perceive it in isolation from every subject, and that his 
imagination of it is quite different from his judgement about it. Conse- 
quently, whatever our intellect believes about the truth of the matter, 
these abstract entities are never formed in the imagination in isolation 
from subjects. 

But since henceforth we shall not be undertaking anything without the 
aid of the imagination, it will be worthwhile to distinguish carefully those 
ideas by means of which the individual meanings of our words are to be 
conveyed to our intellect. To this end we suggest for consideration the 
following three ways of talking: ‘Extension occupies a place’, ‘Body 
possesses extension’, and ‘Extension is not body’. 

The first sentence shows how ‘extension’ may be taken to mean ‘that 
which is extended’. Whether I say ‘Extension occupies a place’ or ‘That 
which is extended occupies a place’, my conception is clearly the same in 
each case. But it does not follow that it is better to use the expression, 


443 


444 


445 


60 Rules for the Direction of the Mind 


‘that which is extended’, for the sake of avoiding ambiguity, for the latter 
expression would not convey so distinctly what we are conceiving, viz. 
that some subject occupies a place in virtue of its being extended. The 
sentence could be taken to mean simply ‘That which is extended is a 
subject occupying a place’, with a sense similar to that of the state- 
ment ‘That which is animate occupies a place.’ It is for this reason that 
we said that here we would be concerned with extension rather than with 
that which is extended, even though we think that there ought to be no 
difference in conception between extension and that which is extended. 

Let us now proceed to the sentence, ‘Body possesses extension.’ Here 
we understand the term ‘extension’ to denote something other than 
‘body’; yet we do not form two distinct ideas in our imagination, 
one of extension, the other of body, but just the single idea of 
extended body. So far as the fact of the matter is concerned I might just as 
well have said ‘Body is extended’, or better still “That which is extended is 
extended.’ This is a peculiarity of those entities which exist only in 
something else, and which can never be conceived apart from a subject. 
But when it comes to entities which are really distinguishable from their 
subjects, the situation is quite different. If, for example, I were to say 
‘Peter has wealth’, my idea of Peter would be quite different from my idea 
of wealth. Again, if I said ‘Paul is wealthy’, the content of my imagination 
would be entirely different from what it would be if I said ‘The wealthy 
man is wealthy.’ Many fail to recognize this difference and make the 
mistake of thinking that extension contains something distinct from that 
which is extended, in the same way as Paul’s wealth is distinct from Paul. 

Finally, take the sentence, ‘Extension is not body.’ The term ‘exten- 
sion’ here is understood in a sense quite different from the one above: 
in this sense there is no specific idea corresponding to it in the 
imagination. In fact this expression is entirely the work of the pure 
intellect: it alone has the ability to distinguish between abstract entities of 
this sort. This is a source of error for many who, not realizing that 
extension taken in this sense cannot be grasped by the imagination, 
represent it by means of a real idea. Now such an idea necessarily 
involves the concept of body. So if they say that extension so conceived is 
not body, they are unwittingly ensnared into saying “The same thing is at 
once body and not body.’ It is very important to distinguish utterances in 
which such terms as ‘extension’, ‘shape’, ‘number’, ‘surface’, ‘line’, 
‘point’, ‘unity’, etc. are given such a narrow sense that they exclude 
something which is not really distinct from what they signify, as for 
example in the statements: ‘Extension or shape is not body’, ‘A number is 
not the thing numbered’, ‘A surface is the limit of a body’, ‘A line is the 
limit of a surface’, ‘A point is the limit of a line’, ‘Unity is not a quantity’, 


Rule Fourteen 61 


etc. All these and similar propositions should be removed completely 
from the imagination if they are to be true. That is why we shall not be 
concerned with them in what follows. 

We must carefully note the following point with respect to all other 
propositions in which these terms retain the same meaning and are used 
in abstraction from subjects, yet do not exclude or deny anything which 
is not really distinct from what they denote: in these cases we can and 
should employ the terms with the help of the imagination. For, even if the 
intellect attends solely and precisely to what the word denotes, the 
imagination nonetheless ought to form a real idea of the thing, so that the 
intellect, when required, can be directed towards the other features of the 
thing which are not conveyed by the term in question, and so that it may 
never injudiciously take these features to be excluded. Thus, when the 
problem concerns number, we imagine some subject which is measurable 
in terms of a set of units. The intellect of course may for the moment 
confine its attention to this set; nevertheless we must see to it that, in 
doing so, it does not draw a conclusion which implies that the thing 
numbered has been excluded from our conception. Those who attribute 
wonderful and mysterious properties to numbers do just that. They 
would surely not believe so firmly in such sheer nonsense, if they did not 
think that number is something distinct from things numbered. Likewise, 
when we are concerned with a figure, we should bear in mind that we are 
dealing with an extended subject, conceived simply with respect to its 
having a shape. When we are concerned with a body, we should bear in 
mind that it is the same thing we are dealing with, in that it is something 
which has length, breadth and depth. In the case of a surface, we should 
conceive of the same thing, as being something with length and breadth — 
this time leaving out depth, though not denying it. In the case of a line, let 
us think of it as having just length; and in the case of a point, the same 
will apply, though this time we should leave out every other property 
save its being an entity. 

Although I am explaining these points at some length here, the 
minds of mortals are so prejudiced that very few, I fear, are in no danger 
of losing their way in this area, and most will find that my long discourse 
gives too brief an account of my meaning. Even arithmetic and geometry 
lead us astray here in spite of their being the most certain of all the arts. 
For does not every arithmetician think that numbers are abstracted from 
every subject by means of the intellect and that they are even to be really 
distinguished from every subject by means of the imagination? Is there a 
geometer who does not muddy the manifest clarity of his subject-matter 
by employing inconsistent principles? The geometer judges that lines 
have no breadth, surfaces no depth, yet he goes on to construct the one 


446 


447 


448 


62 Rules for the Direction of the Mind 


from the other, not realizing that a line, whose flowing motion he 
conceives as creating a surface, is a real body, whereas that which lacks 
breadth is simply a mode of body. But in order not to prolong our 
account of these matters, it will save time if we explain how we are 
supposing our object is to be conceived, our aim being to provide the 
easiest possible demonstration of such truth as may be found in 
arithmetic and geometry. 

In this context, then, we are concerned with an extended object, 
thinking of it exclusively in terms of its extension, and deliberately 
refraining from using the term ‘quantity’; for there are some philosophers 
so subtle that they have even distinguished quantity from extension. We 
are assuming that every problem has been reduced to the point where our 
sole concern is to discover a certain extension on the basis of a 
comparison with some other extension which we already know. For in 
this context we are not expecting to obtain knowledge of any new entity; 
Our intention, rather, is simply to reduce the proportions, however 
complicated, to the point where we can discover some equality between 
that which is unknown and something known. Thus it is certain that 
whatever differences of proportion obtain in other subjects, the same 
differences can also be found to hold between two or more extensions. 
Hence it is enough for our purposes if we consider all the characteristics 
of extension itself which may assist us in elucidating differences in 
proportion. There are only three such characteristics, viz. dimension, 
unity and shape. 

By ‘dimension’ we mean simply a mode or aspect in respect of which 
some subject is considered to be measurable. Thus length, breadth and 
depth are not the only dimensions of a body: weight too is a dimension — 
the dimension in terms of which objects are weighed. Speed is a 
dimension — the dimension of motion; and there are countless other 
instances of this sort. For example, division into several equal parts, 
whether it be a real or merely intellectual division is, strictly speaking, the 
dimension in terms of which we count things. The mode which gives rise 
to number is strictly speaking a species of dimension, though there is 
some difference between the meanings of the two terms. If we consider 
the order of the parts in relation to the whole, we are then said to be 
counting; if on the other hand we regard the whole as being divided up 
into parts, we are measuring it. For example, we measure centuries in 
terms of years, days, hours, minutes; if on the other hand we count 
minutes, hours, days and years, we end up with centuries. 

It is clear from this that there can be countless different dimensions 
within the same subject, that these add absolutely nothing to the things 
which possess them, and that they are understood in the same way 


Rule Fourteen 63 


whether they have a real basis in the objects themselves or are arbitrary 
inventions of our mind. The weight of a body is something real; so too is 
the speed of a motion, or the division of a century into years and days; 
but the division of the day into hours and minutes is not. Yet these all 
function in the same way from the point of view simply of dimension, 
which is how they ought to be viewed here and in the mathematical 
disciplines. Whether dimensions have a real basis is something for the 
physicists to consider. 

Recognition of this fact throws much light on geometry, for in that 
discipline almost everyone misconceives the three species of quantity: the 
line, the surface and the solid. We have already pointed out that the line 
and the surface are not conceived as being really distinct from the solid or 
from one another. Indeed, if they are thought of without respect to 
anything else, as abstractions of the intellect, then they are no more 
different species of quantity than ‘animal’ and ‘living’ in man are different 
species of substances. We should note incidentally that there is merely a 
nominal difference between the three dimensions of body — length, 
breadth and depth; for in any given solid it is quite immaterial which 
aspect of its extension we take as its length, which as its breadth, etc. 
Although these three dimensions have a real basis at any rate in every 
extended thing simply qua extended, we are no more concerned with 
them here than with countless others which are either intellectual fictions 
or have some other basis in things. Thus in the case of a triangle, if we 
wish to measure it exactly, there are three real aspects of it which we need 
to know, viz. its three sides, or two sides and one angle, or two angles 
and its area. Again, in the case of a trapezium there are five factors we 
need to know; in the case of a tetrahedron, six, etc. These can all be 
termed ‘dimensions’. But if we are to select those dimensions which will 
be of the greatest assistance to our imagination, we should never attend 
to more than one or two of them as depicted in our imagination, 
even though we are well aware that there is an indefinite number 
involved in the problem at issue. It is part of the method to distinguish as 
many dimensions as possible, so that, while attending to as few as 
possible at the same time, we nevertheless proceed to take in all of them 
one by one. 

Unity is the common nature which, we said above,! all the things 
which we are comparing must participate in equally. If no determinate 
unit is specified in the problem, we may adopt as unit either one of the 
magnitudes already given or any other magnitude, and this will be the 
common measure of all the others. We shall regard it as having as many 


1 See above, pp. 57f. 


449 


450 


451 


64 Rules for the Direction of the Mind 


dimensions as the extreme terms which are to be compared. We shall 
conceive of it either simply as something extended, abstracting it from 
everything else — in which case it will be the same as a geometrical point 
(the movement of which makes up a line, according to the geometers), or 
as some sort of line, or as a square. 

As for figures, we have already shown how ideas of all things can be 
formed by means of these alone. We have still to point out in this context 
that, of the innumerable different species of figure, we are to use here 
only those which most readily express all the various relations or 
proportions. There are but two kinds of things which are compared with 
each other: sets! and magnitudes. We also have two kinds of figures 
which we may use to represent these conceptually: for example, the 
points, 


which represent a triangular number;* or the diagram which represents 
someone’s family tree, 


Father 


pret am 


Son Daughter 


Figures such as these represent sets; while those which are continuous 
and unbroken, such as A, [_] etc., illustrate magnitudes. 

Moreover, if we are to explain which of all the available figures we are 
going to make use of here, we should know that all the relations which 
may possibly obtain between entities of the same kind should be placed 
under one or other of two categories, viz. order or measure. 

We must know, furthermore, that to work out an order is no mean 
feat, as our method makes clear throughout, that being virtually its entire 
message. But there is no difficulty whatever in recognizing an order once 
we have come upon one. By following Rule Seven we can easily survey in 
our mind the individual parts which we have ordered, because in 


1 Lit. ‘multitudes’ (multitudines). . 
2 Triangular numbers are those which, like 3, 6, 10, 15 etc., can be arranged in the form of 
a triangle when expressed as a set of points. 


Rule Fifteen 65 


relations of this kind the parts are related to one another with respect to 
themselves alone and not by way of an intermediary third term, as is the 
case with measures, which it is our sole concern to explicate here. I can 
recognize what the order between A and B is without considering 
anything over and above these two terms. But I cannot get to know what 
the proportion of magnitude between 2 and 3 is without considering 
some third term, viz. the unit which is the common measure of both. 

Again, we should realize that, with the aid of the unit we have adopted, 
it is sometimes possible completely to reduce continuous magnitudes to a 
set and that this can always be done partially at least. The set of units can 
then be arranged in such an order that the difficulty involved in 
discerning a measure becomes simply one of scrutinizing the order. The 
greatest advantage of our method lies in this progressive ordering. 

The final point we should bear in mind is that among the dimensions of 
a continuous magnitude none is more distinctly conceived than length 
and breadth, and if we are to compare two different things with each 
other, we should not attend at the same time to more than these two 
dimensions in any given figure. For when we have more than two 
different things to compare, our method demands that we survey them 
one by one and concentrate on no more than two of them at once. 

It is easy to see what conclusions follow from these observations. We 
have as much reason to abstract propositions from geometrical figures, if 
the problem has to do with these, as we have from any other subject- 
matter. The only figures that we need to reserve for this purpose are 
rectilinear and rectangular surfaces, or straight lines, which we also call 
figures, because, as we said above,! these are just as good as surfaces in 
assisting us to imagine an object that is really extended. Lastly, these 
same figures must serve to represent sometimes continuous magnitudes, 
sometimes a set or a number. To find a simpler way of expressing 
differences in relation would be beyond the bounds of human endeavour. 


Rule Fifteen 


It is generally helpful if we draw these figures and display them before 
our external senses. In this way it will be easier for us to keep our mind 
alert. 


If we wish to form more distinct images of these figures in our 

imagination with the aid of a visual display, then it is self-evident how 

they should be drawn. For example, we shall depict the unit in three 

ways, viz. by means of a square, D, if we think of it only as having length 

and breadth; by a line, —, if we regard it as having just length; or, lastly, 
1 See pp. 61f. 


452 


453 


454 


66 Rules for the Direction of the Mind 


by a point, . , if we view it as the element which goes to make up a set. But 
however it is depicted and conceived, we shall always understand the unit 
to be in every sense an extended subject and one susceptible of countless 
dimensions. The same goes for the terms of the proposition at issue: if we 
have to attend simultaneously to two different magnitudes belonging to 
the terms, we shall display them visually as a rectangle, two sides of 
which will be the two magnitudes in question. If they are incommensur- 
able with the unit, we shall represent them thus: 


If commensurable, thus: 


or thus: 


Nothing more is needed, except where the problem concerns a set of 
units. If, lastly, we are dealing with just one of the magnitudes of the 
terms, we shall draw a line either in the form of a rectangle, one side of 
which is the magnitude in question and another is the unit, thus: 


pe 


(this is what we do when the same line is to be compared with some 


surface); or simply in the form of a length, thus, ———, if we view it 
simply as an incommensurable length; or thus,..... , if it is a set.! 
Rule Sixteen 


As for things which do not require the immediate attention of the mind, 
however necessary they may be for the conclusion, it is better to represent 
them by very concise symbols rather than by complete figures. It will thus 
be impossible for our memory to go wrong, and our mind will not be 
distracted by having to retain these while it is taken up with deducing 
other matters. 


Moreover, as we said,” we should not contemplate, in one and the same 
visual or mental gaze, more than two of the innumerable different 


1 The translation of this sentence adheres to the text of A and H (following Crapulli). AT 
emend the text in such a way that the phrase ‘draw a line’ becomes ‘draw it’, and ‘when 
the same line’ becomes ‘when it’. 

2 See above, p. 65. 


Rule Sixteen 67 


dimensions which it is possible to depict in the imagination. It is there- 
fore important to retain all the others in such a way that they readily 
come to mind whenever we need to recall them. It seems that memory has 
been ordained by nature for this very purpose. But because memory is 
often unreliable, and in order not to have to squander one jot of our 
attention on refreshing it while engaged with other thoughts, human 
ingenuity has given us that happy invention — the practice of writing. 
Relying on this as an aid, we shall leave absolutely nothing to memory 
but put down on paper whatever we have to retain, thus allowing the 
imagination to devote itself freely and completely to the ideas immediate- 
ly before it. We shall do this by means of very concise symbols, so that 
after scrutinizing each item (in accordance with Rule Nine), we may be 
able (in accordance with Rule Eleven) to run through all of them with the 
swiftest sweep of thought and intuit as many as possible at the same time. 

Therefore, whatever is to be viewed as one thing from the point of view 
of the problem we shall represent by a unique symbol, which can be 
formed in any way we like. But for the sake of convenience, we shall 
employ the letters a, b, c, etc. to express magnitudes already known, and 
A, B, C, etc. for ones that are unknown. To these we shall often prefix the 
numerals, 1, 2, 3, 4, etc. to indicate how many of them there are; again, 
we shall also append these as suffixes to indicate the number of the 
relations which they are to be understood to contain. Thus if I write ‘2a°’, 
that will mean ‘twice the magnitude symbolized by the letter a, which 
contains three relations’. With this device we shall not just be economiz- 
ing with words but, and this is the important point, we shall also be 
displaying the terms of the problem in such a pure and naked light that, 
while nothing useful will be omitted, nothing superfluous will be 
included — nothing, that is, which might needlessly occupy our mental 
powers when our mind is having to take in many things at once. 

For a clearer understanding of these points, we should note first 
that arithmeticians usually represent individual magnitudes by means of 
several units or by some number, whereas in this context we are 
abstracting just as much from numbers as we did from geometrical 
figures a little while back! — or from any matter whatever. We do this, 
both to avoid the tedium of long and unnecessary calculation and, most 
importantly, to see that the parts of the subject relevant to the nature of 
the problem are kept separate at all times and are not bogged down with 
pointless numerical expressions. Thus if the problem is to find the 
hypotenuse of a right-angled triangle whose sides are 9 and 12, the 
arithmetician will say that it is V225 or 15. We on the other hand will 


1 See above, p. 63. 


455 


456 


457 


68 Rules for the Direction of the Mind 


substitute a and b for 9 and 12, and will find the hypotenuse to be 
Va*+b*, which keeps distinct the two parts a* and b? which the 
numerical expression conflates. 

We should note also that those proportions which form a continuing 
sequence are to be understood in terms of a number of relations; others 
endeavour to express these proportions in ordinary algebraic terms by 
means of many dimensions and figures. The first of these they call ‘the 
root’, the second ‘the square’, the third ‘the cube’, the fourth ‘the square 
of the square’. I confess that I have for a long time been misled by these 
expressions. For, after the line and the square, nothing, it seemed, could 
be represented more clearly in my imagination than the cube and other 
figures modelled on these. Admittedly, I was able to solve many a 
problem with the help of these. But through long experience I came to 
realize that by conceiving things in this way I had never discovered 
anything which I could not have found much more easily and distinctly 
without it. I realized that such terminology was a source of conceptual 
confusion and ought to be abandoned completely. For a given magni- 
tude, even though it is called a cube or the square of the square, should 
never be represented in the imagination otherwise than as a line or a 
surface, in accordance with the preceding Rule. So we must note above 
all that the root, the square, the cube, etc. are nothing but magnitudes in 
continued proportion which, it is always supposed, are preceded by the 
arbitrary unit mentioned above.' The first proportional is related to this 
unit immediately and by a single relation; the second proportional is 
related to it by way of the first proportional, and hence by way of two 
relations; the third proportional by way of the first and the second, and 
so by way of three relations, etc.* From now on, then, the magnitude 
referred to in algebra as ‘the root’ we shall term ‘the first proportional’; 
the magnitude referred to as ‘the square’ we shall call ‘the second 
proportional’, and the same goes for the other cases. 

Finally, we must note that, even though we are abstracting the terms of 
a problem from certain numbers in order to investigate its nature, yet it 
often turns out that the problem can be solved in a simpler way by 
employing the given numbers than by abstracting from them. This is due 
to the dual function which numbers have, which is, as we have already 
mentioned,’ sometimes to express order, sometimes measure. According- 
ly, once we have investigated the problem expressed in general terms, we 
should re-express it in terms of given numbers, to see whether these 


1 Cf. above pp. 63ff. 

2 Descartes’ idea here is to express, for example, the series, a, a’, a’, etc. as 1 X a, aX a, 
a* X a, etc. 

3 See above, p. 64. 


Rule Sixteen 69 


might provide us with a simpler solution. For example, once we have 
seen that the hypotenuse of a right-angled triangle with sides a and b is 
Va* + b2, we should substitute 81 for a2 and 144 for b2, the addition of 
which gives us 225. The root of 225, or the mean proportional between 
the unit and 225, is 15. We shall see from this that the length of the 458 
hypotenuse, 15, is commensurable with the lengths of the other sides, 9 
and 12; we shall not generally recognize this from the fact that it is the 
hypotenuse of a right-angled triangle, two sides of which are in the ratio 
of 3 to 4. We insist on these distinctions, seeking as we do a knowledge of 
things that is evident and distinct. The arithmeticians, however, make no 
such distinctions: they are quite content if the sum they are seeking comes 
to light, even though they have no idea how it depends on the data; yet 
that, quite simply, is what knowledge! strictly speaking consists in. 

But in general we should bear in mind that if we can set it down on 
paper, we need never commit to memory anything that does not 
demand our constant attention; otherwise a part of our mind may be 
distracted by needless recollection from its awareness of the object before 
it. We ought to write down a list of the terms of the problem as they were 
stated in the first place; then we should note down the way in which they 
may be abstracted, and the symbols we might use to represent them. The 
purpose of this is that once we have found the solution in terms of these 
symbols, we shall be able to apply it easily to the particular subject we are 
dealing with, without having recourse to memory. For we always 
abstract something more general from something less general. So | shall 
write down the problem in the following way: 


A 


B C 
12 


The question being to find the hypotenuse, AC, of the right-angled 
triangle ABC, I first make an abstraction of the problem, so that the 
question becomes the general one of finding the magnitude of the 
hypotenuse from the magnitudes of the other sides. I then substitute a for 
AB, which is 9, and b for BC, which is 12; and so on in other cases. 

We should point out that further use will be made of these latter four 459 
Rules in the third part of the treatise, though they will be taken in a 


1 Lat. scientia; see footnote on p. 10 above. 


460 


70 Rules for the Direction of the Mind 


somewhat broader sense than they have been given in the present 
exposition. But all this will be made clear in due course. 


Rule Seventeen 


We should make a direct survey of the problem to be solved, disregarding 
the fact that some of its terms are known and others unknown, and 
intuiting, through a train of sound reasoning, the dependence of one term 
on another. 


The preceding four Rules have shown us how to abstract determinate 
and perfectly understood problems from particular subjects and to 
reduce them to the point where the question becomes simply one of 
discovering certain magnitudes on the basis of the fact that they bear 
such and such a relation to certain given magnitudes. Now in the 
following five Rules we shall explain the method of dealing with these 
difficulties, so that no matter how many unknown magnitudes there are 
in a single proposition they can all be arranged in a serial order: the first 
will stand to the unit as the second to the first, and the third to the second 
as the fourth to the third, and so on in due sequence. Thus no matter how 
many of them there are, they will yield a sum equal to some known 
magnitude. So reliable is our method of doing this that we may safely 
assert that, however strenuous our efforts, it would be impossible to 
reduce the magnitudes to simpler terms. 

For the present, however, we should note that in every problem to be 
solved through deduction there is a way of passing from one term to 
another that is plain and direct: it is the easiest way of all, the others 
being more difficult and round-about. In order to understand this point 
we must remember what was said in Rule Eleven, where we explained the 
nature of that sequence of interlinked propositions which enabled us to 
see easily,’ when comparing individual propositions, how the first and 
the last ones are interrelated, even if we cannot deduce the intermediate 
ones so easily from the first and last ones. Now if, in order to deduce the 
way in which the last one depends on the first, we intuit the interdepend- 
ence between the individual propositions without ever interrupting the 
order, we are going through the problem in a direct way. If on the other 
hand we know the first and last propositions to be interconnected in a 
definite way, and we wish to deduce from this the intermediate ones 
connecting them, the order we follow will be completely indirect and the 
reverse of the previous one.* Now we are concerned here only with 


1 See above, pp. 37f. 2 Cf. above, pp. 24, 38. 


Rule Eighteen 71 


complicated questions where the problem is to discern, albeit in a 
complicated order, certain intermediate propositions, on the basis of our 
knowledge of the first and last propositions in the series. So the trick here 
is to treat the unknown ones as if they were known. This may enable us 
to adopt the easy and direct method of inquiry even in the most 
complicated of problems. There is no reason why we should not always 
do this, since from the outset of this part of the treatise! our assumption 
has been that we know that the unknown terms in the problem are so 
dependent on the known ones that they are wholly determined by them. 
Accordingly, we shall be carrying out everything this Rule prescribes if, 
recognizing that the unknown is determined by the known, we reflect on 
the terms which occur to us first and count the unknown ones among the 
known, so that by reasoning soundly step by step we may deduce from 
these all the rest, even the known terms as if they are unknown. We shall 
postpone illustrating this point (and most of the points to be dealt with 
below) until Rule Twenty-four:? it will be more convenient to expound 
them there. 


Rule Eighteen 


For this purpose only four operations are required: addition, subtraction, 
multiplication and division. The latter two operations should seldom be 
employed here, for they may lead to needless complication, and they can 
be carried out more easily later. 


A large number of rules is often the result of inexperience in the teacher. 
Things are much clearer when they are brought under one single general 
precept rather than split up among many particular ones. For this reason 
we are bringing under just four heads all the operations needed for 
working out a problem, i.e. for deducing some magnitudes from others. 
How it is that these are all we need will become clearer from our account 
of them. 

When we come to know one magnitude on the basis of our prior 
knowledge of the parts which make it up, the process is one of addition. 
When we discover a part on the basis of our prior knowledge of the 
whole and the extent to which the whole exceeds the part, the process is 
one of subtraction: there is no other possible way of deriving one 
magnitude from other magnitudes, taken in an absolute sense, which 
somehow contain it. But if we are to derive some magnitude from others 
which are quite different from it and which in no way contain it, it is 


1 le. from Rule Thirteen. 
2 The Rules in fact end at Rule Twenty-one; see Translator’s preface, p. 7 above. 


461 


462 


463 


464 


72 Rules for the Direction of the Mind 


necessary to find some way of relating it to them. If this relation or 
connection is to be made in a direct way, then we must use 
multiplication; if in an indirect way, then division. 

In order to give a clear account of the latter two operations, we must 
be apprised of the fact that the unit, which we have spoken about earlier, ! 
is here the basis and foundation of all the relations, and occupies the first 
place in a series of magnitudes which are in continued proportion. The 
given magnitudes occupy the second place in the series, while those to be 
discovered occupy the third, fourth, and the remaining places, if the 
problem in question’ is a direct one. If, however, the problem is an 
indirect one, the given magnitude comes last, and the magnitude sought 
comes in the second place or in other intermediate places. 

Thus if we are told that as the unit stands to a given magnitude a 
(5, say), so b (7, say) stands to the number we are seeking, which is ab 
(i.e. 35), then a and b occupy the second place, and their product, ab, 
comes in the third place.’ Again, if we are told that as the unit is to c (e.g. 
9), so ab (e.g. 35) is to the number sought, abc (i.e. 315), then abc 
occupies the fourth place, and is the product of the two multiplications 
with respect to ab, and c, which occupy the second place;* the same holds 
for other cases. Again, as the unit is to a (i.e. 5), so @ is to a? (i.e. 25); 
likewise as the unit is to a (i.e. §), so a? (i.e. 25) is to a (i.e. 125); and 
lastly as the unit is to a (i.e. 5), so a (i.e. 125) is to a* (i.e. 625), etc. For 
whether a magnitude is multiplied by itself or by a quite different 
magnitude, the process of multiplication is the same. 

If, however, we are told that as the unit is to a given divisor, a (e.g. 5), 
so the magnitude we are seeking, B (e.g. 7) is to the given dividend, ab 
(i.e. 35), then the order is confused and indirect,’ for B can be obtained 
only by dividing the datum ab by the datum a. The case is the same if the 
statement is that as the unit is to A (e.g. 5), the number sought, so A is to 
the datum, a? (i.e. 25); or as the unit is to A (5), the number sought, so is 
A? (25) to the datum, a? (i.e. 125). And the same is true in other cases. These 
examples are all included under the term ‘division’, although we should 
note that the latter two instances of division are more difficult than the 
former, since there are more occurrences of the magnitude sought, which 
therefore involves a greater number of relations. The significance of the 
latter examples would be the same if we were to employ expressions 
commonly used by arithmeticians, such as, ‘Extract the square root of a* 


1 Cf. above pp. 63, 68. 

2 Reading propositio, A, H. AT unnecessarily emend to proportio (‘proportion’). 

3 The formula here is 1/a = a/x. 4 The formula here is 1/c = ab/x. 

5 Henceforth Descartes uses capital letters to denote the unknown magnitudes. See above, 


p. 67. 


Rule Eighteen 73 


(e.g. 25)’, or ‘Extract the cube root of a? (e.g. 125)’ — and similarly in the 
other cases. Alternatively, the problems may be couched in geometrical 
terms: it amounts to the same thing whether we say ‘Find the mean 
proportional between the arbitrary magnitude called “‘the unit” and that 
denoted by the expression a?’, or ‘Find two mean proportionals between 
the unit and a’, etc. 

From these considerations it is easy to see how these two operations 
are all we need for the purpose of discovering whatever magnitudes we 
are required to deduce from others on the basis of some relation. Once 
we have understood these operations, the next thing to do is to explain 
how to present them to the imagination for examination, and how to 
display them visually, so that later on we may explain their uses or 
applications. 

If addition or subtraction is to be used, we conceive the subject in the 
form of a line, or in the form of an extended magnitude in which length 
alone! is to be considered. For if we are to add line a to line b, 


a b 
SS -——_1———+ 
we add the one to the other, in the following way, 
a b 

(ncn cE, ee re, 

[_-—_—+—___1-____-___1____J 
and the result is c: 

C 
}_——__2A——_1____1_____1 J 


But if the smaller magnitude is to be taken away from the larger, viz.b 465 
from a, 


b a 
|—___1______] }-_——_—_1—___1-__| 


we place the one above the other thus: 


in eos 


a -_—_+—__1——__ 


and this will give us that segment of the larger one which the smaller one 
cannot cover, v?Z., 


6 eS 


1 Reading in qua sola, H (following Crapulli). AT read in qua sola. A, ‘in which thing 
alone’. 


74 Rules for the Direction of the Mind 


In multiplication we also conceive the given magnitudes in the form of 
lines; though in this case we imagine them as forming a rectangle. For if 
we multiply a by 5, 


a b 
j}_—_1—-__1_____| }___—1.___ 
we fit one line at right angles to the other, thus: 
a 
b 
to make the rectangle: 
a 
b 


466 Again, if we wish to multiply ab by c, 


Cc 


}-—_———___1—__1____| 


we ought to conceive ab as a line, v1z., 


ab 
}-_—_—_+—___1+—___1___1.__4_____} 


in order to obtain for abc the following figure: 


ab 


Rule Eighteen 75 


Lastly, in division, where the divisor is given, we imagine the magni- 
tude to be divided as being a rectangle, one side of which is the divisor 
and the other the quotient. Thus if the rectangle ab is to be divided by a, 


a 


we take away from it the breadth a, and are left with b as the quotient: 


b 
——— 


If, on the other hand, we divide the same rectangle by b, we take away 467 
the height b, and the quotient will be a: 


a 


-_—_____1-__+ 


As for those divisions in which the divisor is not given but only 
indicated by some relation, as when we are required to extract the square 
root or the cube root etc., in these cases we must note that the term to be 
divided, and all the other terms, are always to be conceived as lines which 
form a series of continued proportionals, the first member of which is the 
unit, and the last the magnitude to be divided.! We shall explain in due 
course how to find any number of mean proportionals between the latter 
two magnitudes. For the moment we must be content to point out that 
we are assuming that we have not yet quite done with these operations, 
since in order to be performed they require indirect and reverse move- 
ments of the imagination, and at present we are dealing only with 
problems which are to be treated in the direct manner. 

As for the other operations, we can easily dispose of these if we 
conceive them along the lines recommended above. But we have still to 
show how their terms are initially to be set out. For although, on first 
dealing with a problem, we are free to conceive of its terms as if they were 
lines or rectangles, without assigning any other figures to them (as stated 
in Rule Fourteen),” nevertheless in the course of the operation it 
frequently turns out that a rectangle, which has been produced by the 468 
multiplication of two lines, has to be conceived as a line, for the sake of 
some further operation. Or again, the same rectangle, or a line resulting 


1 Cf. above, pp. 72f. 2 Cf. above, p. 65. 


469 


76 Rules for the Direction of the Mind 


from an addition or subtraction, has to be conceived as a different 
rectangle drawn above the line which has been designated as its divisor. 

It is therefore important to explain here how every rectangle can be 
transformed into a line, and conversely how a line or even a rectangle can 
be transformed into another rectangle, one side of which is specified. 
Geometers can do this very easily, provided they recognize that in 
comparing lines with some rectangle (as we are now doing), we always 
conceive the lines as rectangles, one side of which is the length which we 
adopted as our unit. In this way, the entire business is reduced to the 
following problem: given a rectangle, to construct upon a given side 
another rectangle equal to it. 

The merest beginner in geometry is of course perfectly familiar with 
this; nevertheless I want to make the point, in case it should seem that I 
have omitted something. 


Rule Nineteen 


Using this method of reasoning, we must try to find as many magnitudes, 
expressed in two different ways, as there are unknown terms, which we 
treat as known in order to work out the problem in the direct way. That 
will give us as many comparisons between two equal terms.! 


Rule Twenty 


Once we have found the equations, we must carry out the operations 
which we have left aside,* never using multiplication when division is in 
order. 


Rule Twenty-one 


If there are many equations of this sort, they should all be reduced to a 
single one, viz. to the equation whose terms occupy fewer places in the 
series of magnitudes which are in continued proportion, 1.e. the series in 
which the order of the terms is to be arranged. 


THE END? 


1 Descartes’ Geometry suggests that by the phrase ‘expressed in two different ways’ 
he means ‘expressed in equations’. The point seems to be that if a problem is to be 
determinate, there must be as many equations as there are unknowns. Cf. Geometry, AT 
VI 373. 

2 Ie. multiplication and division. 

3 As far as we know, Descartes did not complete Rules Nineteen to Twenty-one. ‘THE END’ 
occurs in A and H. 


77 


Appendix 


[The extract which follows is from the second edition of Antoine Arnauld 
and Pierre Nicole’s Logic or the Art of Thinking (1664).! It is known that 
the authors made use of Descartes’ Rules when preparing the second 
edition of their work. In chapter 2 of part 4 they provide a loose 
paraphrase of the latter part of Rule Thirteen.* The paraphrase contains 
an additional passage which occupies a place corresponding to a lacuna 
in Rule Thirteen, and it may possibly be a paraphrase of some of the 
missing material. ] 


Problems concerning things can be reduced to four main sorts. 

In the first sort of problem causes are sought by way of effects. We 
know, for example, the various effects of the magnet, and we try to find 
the causes of these effects. We know the various effects which are usually 
attributed to nature’s abhorrence of a vacuum; we inquire whether the 
latter is the true cause of these effects, and have discovered that it is not.? 
We are familiar with the ebb and flow of the tide, and we want to know 
what can cause such a great and regular movement. 

In the second sort of problem we try to discover effects by way of 
causes. It has always been known, for example, that wind and water can 
move bodies with great force; but the ancients did not sufficiently 
investigate what the effects of these causes could be, and so did not apply 
them, as they have since been applied in mills, to many things which are 
very useful to human society and notably ease the burden of human 
labour, and which ought to be the harvest of true physics. Consequently 
we can say that the first sort of problem, in which causes are sought by 
way of their effects, constitutes the entire speculative side of physics, 
while the second sort of problem, in which effects are sought by way of 
causes, constitutes the entire practical side. 

In the third sort of problem a whole is sought by way of its parts, as for 
example when we try to find the sum of several numbers by adding them 
together, or when, given two numbers, we try to find their product by 
multiplying them together. 

In the fourth sort of problem we try to find a part of a whole, given the 


1 From ch. 2, part 4, pp. 391ff (AT x 471ff). 2 See above, pp. 54ff. 

3 Perhaps a tacit reference to Pascal’s Treatise on the Equilibrium of Liquids and the 
Weight of the Atmosphere. Since the latter work was published in 1663 (after Descartes 
death), some of the content of the above extract (perhaps all) may be due to Arnauld. 


AT X 
471 


472 


78 Rules for the Direction of the Mind 


whole and some other part of it, as when, given a number and another 
number to be subtracted from it, we try to find the remainder; or when, 
given a number, we try to find such and such a part of it. 

But in order to extend the scope of the latter two sorts of problem, so 
that they include what could not properly be brought under the former 
two sorts, we must note that the word ‘part’ has to be taken in a very wide 
sense, as signifying everything that goes to make up a thing — its modes, 
its extremities, its accidents, its properties, and in general all its attri- 
butes. Accordingly we shall be seeking a whole by way of its parts when 
we try to find the area of a triangle, given its height and its base. On the 
other hand we shall be seeking a part by way of the whole together with 
another part when we try to find a side of a rectangle on the basis of our 
knowledge of its area and one of its sides. 


The World and Treatise on Man 


Translator’s Preface 


The World and Treatise on Man are two parts of a work which Descartes 
wrote in French during the years 1629—33, and which the condemnation 
of Galileo by the Roman Inquisition caused him not to publish. They 
were published posthumously. 

The World first appeared at Paris in 1664, under the title Le Monde de 
M. Descartes ou le Traité de la Lumiére. But this edition was based only 
on a copy of the original manuscript, and in 1677 Clerselier produced a 
version based on the original. The Treatise on Man was published at 
Paris in 1664 under the title L Homme de René Descartes, again edited 
by Clerselier and based on the original manuscript (a Latin translation 
based on a copy of the original having appeared at Leiden in 1662). 

Although published separately, the works are part of a single treatise. 
In this treatise, Descartes tells Mersenne in November 1629, ‘instead of 
explaining only one phenomenon, I have resolved to explain all the 
phenomena of nature, i.e. all of physics’. And on 22 July 1633 Descartes 
announced to Mersenne that his treatise was almost finished, needing 
only to be corrected and recopied. While revising the work, however, 
Descartes learned that the Church had condemned Galileo for publishing 
his views about the motion of the earth, and in November 1633 he 
informed Mersenne that he had decided not to publish the treatise. ‘For’, 
he wrote, ‘I would not for all the world want a discourse to issue from me 
that contained the least word of which the Church would disapprove, 
and so I would prefer to suppress it than to have it appear in a mangled 
form.’ 

From the contents of the published works and Descartes’ account of 
them in his correspondence and in the Discourse, it appears that the 
suppressed treatise began with the work published as The World, 
continued with two chapters (now lost) linking this material with the 
contents of the Treatise on Man, and concluded with the latter work. But 
the published Treatise on Man is itself incomplete, containing frequent 
references to subsequent discussions of the rational soul and its relation 
to the body, which have been lost or were incorporated by Descartes in 
his later writings. In addition, it may be conjectured that the suppressed 


79 


80 The World and The Treatise on Man 


treatise contained material later published in the Meteorology and the 
Principles of Philosophy. 

The present translation, consisting of Chapters 1, 2, 3 (in part), 4, 5 (in 
part), 6 and 7 (with an omission) from The World, and substantial 
extracts from the Treatise on Man, is based on the text in Volume x1 of 
Adam and Tannery.! Thus it follows the 1677 version of The World 
(though, as Adam notes, the chapter headings were probably added by 
Clerselier) and the 1664 version of the Treatise on Man (but without 
Clerselier’s division of the work into chapters). 

R.S. 


1 See General Introduction, p. x above. 


THE WORLD or TREATISE ON LIGHT 


Chapter1 The difference between our sensations and the 
things that produce them 


The subject I propose to deal with in this treatise is light, and the first 
point I want to draw to your attention is that there may be a difference 
between the sensation we have of light (i.e. the idea of light which is 
formed in our imagination by the mediation of our eyes) and what it is in 
the objects that produces this sensation within us (i.e. what it is in a flame 
or the sun that we call by the name ‘light’). For although everyone is 
commonly convinced that the ideas we have in our mind are wholly 
similar to the objects from which they proceed, nevertheless I cannot see 
any reason which assures us that this is so. On the contrary, I note many 
observations which should make us doubt it. 

Words, as you well know, bear no resemblance to the things they 
signify, and yet they make us think of these things, frequently even 
without our paying attention to the sound of the words or to their 
syllables. Thus it may happen that we hear an utterance whose meaning 
we understand perfectly well, but afterwards we cannot say in what 
language it was spoken. Now if words, which signify nothing except by 
human convention, suffice to make us think of things to which they bear 
no resemblance, then why could nature not also have established some 
sign which would make us have the sensation of light, even if the sign 
contained nothing in itself which is similar to this sensation? Is it not thus 
that nature has established laughter and tears, to make us read joy and 
sadness on the faces of men? 

But perhaps you will say that our ears really cause us to perceive only 
the sound of the words, and our eyes only the countenance of the person 
who is laughing or weeping, and that it is our mind which, recollecting 
what the words and the countenance signify, represents their meaning to 
us at the same time. I could reply that by the same token it is our mind 
which represents to us the idea of light each time our eye is affected by the 
action which signifies it. But rather than waste time debating the 
question, I prefer to bring forward another example. 


8I 


AT XI 


5 


83> The World 


Suppose we hear only the sound of some words, without attending to 
their meaning. Do you think the idea of this sound, as it is formed in our 
mind, is anything like the object which is its cause? A man opens his 
mouth, moves his tongue, and breathes out: I do not see anything in these 
actions which is not very different from the idea of the sound which they 
make us imagine. Most philosophers maintain that sound is nothing but 
a certain vibration of air which strikes our ears. Thus, if the sense of 
hearing transmitted to our mind the true image of its object then, instead 
of making us conceive the sound, it would have to make us conceive the 
motion of the parts of the air which is then vibrating against our ears. But 
not everyone will wish to believe what the philosophers say, and so I shall 
bring forward yet another example. 

Of all our senses, touch is the one considered the least deceptive and 
most certain. Thus, if I show you that even touch makes us conceive 
many ideas which bear no resemblance to the objects which produce 
them, I do not think you should find it strange if I say that sight can do 
likewise. Now, everyone knows that the ideas of tickling and of pain, 
which are formed in our mind on the occasion of our being touched by 
external bodies, bear no resemblance to these bodies. Suppose we pass a 
feather gently over the lips of a child who is falling asleep, and he feels 
himself being tickled. Do you think the idea of tickling which he 
conceives resembles anything present in this feather? A soldier returns 
from battle; in the heat of combat he might have been wounded without 
being aware of it. But now, as he begins to cool off, he feels pain and 
believes himself wounded. We call a surgeon, who examines the soldier 
after we remove his armour, and we find in the end that what he was 
feeling was nothing but a buckle or strap caught under his armour, which 
was pressing on him and causing his discomfort. If his sense of touch, in 
making him feel this strap, had imprinted an image of it in his mind, there 
would have been no need for a surgeon to inform him of what he was 
feeling. 

Now, I see no reason which compels us to believe that what it is in 
objects that gives rise to the sensation of light is any more like this 
sensation than the actions of a feather and a strap are like a tickling 
sensation and pain. And yet I have not brought up these examples to 
make you believe categorically that the light in the objects is something 
different from what it is in our eyes. I merely wanted you to suspect that 
there might be a difference, so as to keep you from assuming the 
opposite, and to make you better able to help me in examining the matter 
further. 


The World 83 


Chapter 2 What the heat and the light of fire consist in 7 


I know of only two sorts of bodies in the world in which light is present, 
namely the stars and flame or fire. And because the stars are undoubtedly 
less accessible to human knowledge than fire or flame, I shall try first to 
explain what I observe regarding flame. 

When flame burns wood or some other similar material, we can see 
with the naked eye that it sets the minute parts of the wood in motion 
and separates them from one another, thus transforming the finer parts 
into fire, air and smoke, and leaving the coarser parts as ashes. Others 
may, if they wish, imagine the form of fire, the quality of heat, and 
the process of burning to be completely different things in the wood. For 
my part, I am afraid of mistakenly supposing there is anything more in 
the wood than what I see must necessarily be in it, and so I am content to 
limit my conception to the motion of its parts. For you may posit ‘fire’ 
and ‘heat’ in the wood, and make it burn as much as you please: but if 
you do not suppose in addition that some of its parts move about and 
detach themselves from their neighbours, I cannot imagine it undergoing 
any alteration or change. On the other hand, if you take away the ‘fire’, 
take away the ‘heat’, and keep the wood from ‘burning’; then, provided 
only that you grant me there is some power which puts its finer parts into 
violent motion and separates them from the coarser parts, I consider that 8 
this power alone will be able to bring about all the same changes that we 
observe in the wood when it burns. 

Now since it does not seem possible to conceive how one body could 
move another except through its own movement, I conclude that the 
body of the flame which acts upon the wood is composed of minute 
parts, which move about independently of one another with a very rapid 
and very violent motion. As they move about in this way they push 
against the parts of the bodies they are touching and move those which 
do not offer them too much resistance. I say that the flame’s parts move 
about individually, for although many of them often work together to 
bring about a single effect, we see nevertheless that each of them acts on 
its own upon the bodies they touch. I say, too, that their motion is very 
rapid and very violent, for they are so minute that we cannot distinguish 
them by sight, and so they would not have the force they have to act upon 
the other bodies if the rapidity of their movement did not compensate for 
their lack of size. 

I add nothing about the direction in which each part moves. For the 
power to move and the power that determines in what direction the 
motion must take place are completely different things, and can exist one 9 


IO 


84 The World 


without the other (as I have explained in the Optics).! If you consider this 
fact, you will easily recognize that each part moves in the manner made 
least difficult for it by the disposition of the bodies surrounding it. In the 
same flame there may be some parts going up, others going down, some 
going in straight lines, others in circles, and some in every direction, all 
without any variation in the flame’s nature. Thus if you see almost all the 
parts tending upward you need not think this is happening for any reason 
except that the other bodies touching them are almost always disposed to 
offer them more resistance in all the other directions. 

But now that we have recognized that the parts of a flame move in this 
manner, and that it suffices to conceive of their motions in order to 
understand how the flame has the power to consume the wood and to 
burn, I suggest that we ask whether the same will not also suffice to make 
us understand how the flame provides us with heat and light. For if 
that is the case, it will not be necessary for the flame to possess any other 
quality, and we shall be able to say that it is this motion alone which is 
called now ‘heat’ and now ‘light’, according to the different effects it 
produces. 

As regards heat, the sensation we have of it may, I think, be taken for a 
kind of pain when the motion is violent, and sometimes for a kind of 
tickling when the motion is moderate. And since we have already said 
that there is nothing outside our thought which is similar to the ideas we 
conceive of tickling and pain, we may well believe also that there is 
nothing which is similar to the idea we conceive of heat; rather, this 
sensation may be produced in us by anything that can set up various 
motions in the minute parts of our hands or of any other place in our 
body. This view is supported by many observations.” For we can heat our 
hands merely by rubbing them together, and any other body can also be 
heated without being placed near a fire, provided only that it is agitated 
and shaken so that many of its minute parts move about and thereby can 
move the minute parts of our hands. 

As regards light, we can also conceive that this same motion in the 
flame is sufficient to cause our sensation of it. But since this forms the 
main part of my project, I shall try to explain it at some length when I 
resume discussion of this matter. 


Chapter 3 Hardness and fluidity 


I believe that countless different motions go on perpetually in the world. 
After noting the greatest of these (which bring about the days, months 
and years), I take note that terrestrial vapours constantly rise to the 


11 clouds and descend from them, that the air is forever agitated by the 


1 Cf. pp. 15 5ff below. 2, See note on p. 143 below. 


The World 85 


winds, that the sea is never at rest, that springs and rivers flow 
ceaselessly, that the strongest buildings eventually fall into decay, that 
plants and animals are always growing or decaying — in short, that there 
is nothing anywhere which is not changing. From this I know clearly that 
a flame is not the only thing in which there are a number of minute parts 
in ceaseless motion, but that every other body has such parts, even 
though their actions are not so violent and they are so minute that they 
cannot be perceived by any of our senses. 

I shall not pause to seek the cause of their motions, for it suffices for me 
to suppose that they began to move as soon as the world began to exist. 
That being the case, I find by my reasoning that their motions cannot 
possibly ever cease, or even change in any way except in respect of their 
subject. That is to say, the virtue or power of self-movement found in one 
body may indeed pass wholly or partially into another and thus be no 
longer present in the first; but it cannot entirely cease to exist in the 
world. My arguments, I say, are enough to satisfy me on this point; but I 
have not yet had occasion to relate them to you. In the meantime you 
may imagine if you wish (as do most of the learned) that there is some 
prime mover which, travelling about the world at a speed beyond 
comprehension, is the origin and source of all the other motions found in 
ita 


Chapter 4 The void, and how it happens that our senses do 
not perceive certain bodies 


But we must examine in greater detail why air, although it too is a body, 
cannot be perceived by the senses as well as other bodies. In this way we 
shall free ourselves from an error that has gripped all of us since our 
childhood, when we came to believe that there are no bodies around us 
except those capable of being perceived by the senses, and therefore that 
if air were one of them (because we perceive it to some extent) it could 
not be so material or solid as those we perceive to a greater extent. 

On this subject I should first like you to note that all bodies, both hard 
and fluid, are made from the same matter, and that it is impossible to 
conceive of the parts of this matter ever composing a more solid body, or 
one occupying less space, than they do when each of them is touched on 
all sides by the other surrounding parts. It follows, on my view, that if a 
vacuum can exist anywhere, it must be in hard bodies rather than in fluid 
1 Descartes goes on to explain the difference between hard bodies and fluid bodies in terms 

of the motion of their parts. The hardest body imaginable is one whose parts, in a state of 

complete rest, touch each other with no space between any two; and the most fluid body 
is one whose smallest parts are constantly moving away from each other in rapid and 
random motion, while still touching each other on all sides. Cf. Principles, Part 2, art. 


54-5, pp. 245f below. For an English version of material omitted here and below, see 
René Descartes: The World, tr. M. S. Mahoney (N.Y.: Abaris, 1979). 


I2 


(16) 


17 


18 


19 


86 The World 


ones. For obviously it is easier for the parts of hard bodies to press and 
arrange themselves against one another than for the parts of fluid bodies 
to do so, since the latter are moving about while the former are 
motionless. 

For example, when you put powder into a jar, you shake the jar and 
tap it to make room for more powder. But if you pour some liquid into a 
jar, it immediately settles down automatically into the smallest place you 
could put it. And indeed, if you consider some of the experiments which 
philosophers commonly use to show that there is no vacuum in nature, 
you will readily recognize that all those spaces which people consider 
empty, where we perceive only air, are at least as full, and filled with the 
same matter, as the spaces where we perceive other bodies. 

We know from observations of certain machines that nature causes the 
heaviest bodies to rise and the hardest to shatter, rather than permitting 
any of their parts to stop touching one another or to come into contact 
with any other bodies. Tell me, if you please, how likely it is that nature 
would do this while yet allowing the parts of air, which are so easy to 
bend and to arrange in all ways, to remain next to each other without 
being touched on all sides, or without there being any other body 
between them which they touch? Could one really believe that the water 
in a well has to rise, contrary to its natural inclination, merely in order 
that the pipe of a pump may be filled, or think that the water in clouds 
does not have to fall in order to fill the spaces here on earth, if there were 
even the least vacuum between the parts of the bodies they contain? 

But here you might bring forward a difficulty which is rather important 
— namely, that the component parts of fluid bodies cannot, it seems, 
move about incessantly as I have said they do, unless there is empty space 
between them, at least in the places which the parts vacate as they move 
about. I would have difficulty in replying if I had not learned, through 
various observations, that all the motions which take place in the world 
are in some way circular. That is, when a body leaves its place, it always 
enters into the place of some other body, and so on to the last body, 
which at the same instant occupies the place vacated by the first. Thus 
there is no more of a vacuum between bodies when they are moving 
about than when they are at rest. And note here that in order for this to 
happen it is not necessary that all the parts of bodies moving together 
should be arranged exactly in a ring, as in a true circle, nor even that they 
should be of equal size and shape. For any such inequalities can easily be 
counter-balanced by other inequalities in their speed. 

We do not usually notice these circular motions when bodies are 
moving in the air, because we are accustomed to conceiving of the air 
only as an empty space. But look at fish swimming in the pool of a 


The World 87 


fountain: if they do not come too near the surface of the water, they 
cause no motion in it at all, even though they are passing beneath it with 
great speed. From this it clearly appears that the water they push before 
them does not push all the water in the pool indiscriminately: it pushes 
only the water which can best serve to perfect the circle of their move- 
ment and to occupy the place which they vacate. 

This observation is enough to show the ease and familiarity with which 
these circular motions occur in nature. But I want now to adduce another 
observation, in order to show that no motion ever takes place which is 
not circular. When the wine in a cask does not flow from the bottom 
opening because the top is completely closed, it is improper to say, as 
they ordinarily do, that this takes place through ‘fear of a vacuum’. We 
are well aware that the wine has no mind to fear anything; and even if it 
did, I do not know for what reason it could be apprehensive of this 
vacuum, which indeed is nothing but a chimera. Instead we must say that 
the wine cannot leave the cask because outside everything is as full as can 
be, and the part of the air whose place the wine would occupy if it were 
to flow out can find no other place to occupy in all the rest of the universe 
unless we make an opening in the top of the cask through which the air 
can rise by a circular path into its place. 

For all that, I do not wish to insist that there is no vacuum at all in 
nature. My treatise would, I fear, become too long if I undertook to 
explain the matter at length, and the observations of which I have spoken 
are not sufficient to prove my point, although they are enough to confirm 
that the spaces in which we perceive nothing by our senses are filled with 
the same matter as those occupied by the bodies that we do perceive, and 
contain at least as much of this matter as the latter spaces. Thus, for 
example, when a vessel is full of gold or lead, it contains no more matter 
than when we think it is empty. This may seem very strange to many 
people, whose reason extends no further than their fingertips, and who 
suppose that there is nothing in the world except what they touch. But 
when you have given a little consideration to what makes us perceive a 
body by our senses, or not perceive it, ] am sure that you will find nothing 
incredible in this. For you will recognize it as evident that, so far from all 
the things around us being perceivable, on the contrary those that usually 
are there are the least perceivable, and those that are always there can 
never be perceived at all. 

The heat of our heart is very great, but we do not feel it because it is 
usually there. The weight of our body is not small, but it does not 
discomfort us. We do not even feel the weight of our clothes, because we 
are accustomed to wearing them. The reason for this is clear enough: for 
it is certain that we cannot perceive any body by our senses unless it is the 


20 


21 


22. 


23 


88 The World 


cause of some change in our sense organs — that is, unless it somehow 
moves the minute parts of the matter of which these organs are 
composed. Objects which are not always present can indeed do this, 
provided they have enough force; for if they damage something in the 
sense organs while acting on them, that can be repaired afterwards by 
nature, when they are no longer acting. But regarding the objects which 
continually touch us, if they ever had the power to produce any change in 
our senses and to move some parts of their matter, they must have moved 
these parts, and thereby separated them entirely from the others, at the 
outset of our life; and in this way they can have left there only the parts 
which completely resist their action and by means of which they cannot 
be perceived by our senses in any way. From this you can see that it is no 
wonder that there are many spaces about us in which we do not perceive 
any body by our senses, even though they contain no fewer bodies than 
the spaces in which we perceive the most. 

It must not be thought, however, that the ordinary air which we draw 
into our lungs while breathing — the air which turns into wind when set in 
motion, which seems hard when enclosed in a balloon, and which is 
composed only of exhalations and fumes — is as solid as water or earth. 
Here we must follow the common opinion of the philosophers, who all 
maintain that it is rarer. This can easily be known through observation. 
For when the parts of a drop of water are separated from one another by 
the agitation of heat, they can make up much more of this ordinary air 
than could be contained in the space that held the water. From this it 
follows with certainty that there are a great number of tiny gaps between 
the parts of which the air is composed, for there is no other way to 
conceive of a rare body. But since these gaps cannot be empty, as I have 
said above, I conclude that there are necessarily some other bodies, one 
or many, mixed in with the air, and these bodies fill as tightly as possible 
the tiny gaps left between its parts. It now only remains for me to 
consider what these other bodies can be; after that, I hope it will not be 
difficult to understand what the nature of light can be. 


Chapter 5 The number of elements and their qualities 


The philosophers maintain that above the clouds there is a kind of air 
much finer than ours, which is not composed of terrestrial vapours, 
as our air is, but constitutes a separate element. They say too that above 
this air there is yet another body, much finer again, which they call the 
element of fire. They add, moreover, that these two elements are mixed 
with water and earth to make up all the bodies below. Thus I shall merely 


The World 89 


be following their opinion if I say that this finer air and this element of 
fire fill the gaps which are between the parts of the ordinary air we 
breathe, so that these bodies, interlaced with one another, make up a 
mass which is as solid as any body can be. 

But in order to get you to understand my thought on this subject, and 
so that you will not think I want to compel you to believe all that the 
philosophers tell you about the elements, I must describe them to you in 
my own fashion .. .! 

If you find it strange that in explaining these elements I do not use the 
qualities called ‘heat’, ‘cold’, ‘moisture’ and ‘dryness’ — as the philo- 
sophers do —I shall say to you that these qualities themselves seem to me 
to need explanation. Indeed, unless I am mistaken, not only these four 
qualities but all the others as well, including even the forms of inanimate 
bodies, can be explained without the need to suppose anything in their 
matter other than the motion, size, shape, and arrangement of its parts. 
In consequence | shall easily be able to get you to understand why I do 
not acknowledge any elements other than the three I have described. For 
the difference that must exist between them and the other bodies, which 
philosophers call ‘mixed’ or ‘composite’, consists in the fact that the 
forms of these mixed bodies always contain some qualities which oppose 
and counteract one another, or which at least do not tend to the 
preservation of one another. But in fact the forms of the elements must be 
simple and must not have any qualities which do not accord so perfectly 
with one another that each contributes to the preservation of all the others. 

Now I cannot find any such forms in the world except the three I have 
described. For the form I have attributed to the first element consists in its 
parts moving so extremely rapidly and being so minute that there are no 
other bodies capable of stopping them; and in addition they need not 
have any determinate size, shape, or position. The form of the second 
element consists in its parts being so moderate in their motion and size 
that if there are many causes in the world which may increase their 
motion and decrease their size, there are just as many others which can 
do exactly the opposite; and so they always remain balanced as it were in 
the same moderate condition. And the form of the third element consists 
in its parts being so large or so closely joined together that they always 
have the force to resist the motions of the other bodies. 

Examine as much as you please all the forms that can be given to 
mixed bodies by the various motions, the various shapes and sizes, and 
the different arrangement of the parts of matter: I am sure you will find 
none that does not contain in itself qualities which tend to bring it about 


1 There follows a brief description of the three elements fire, air and earth, which Descartes 
distinguishes solely in terms of the size, shape and motion of their parts. 


24 


27 


32 


33 


Te The World 


that matter undergoes change and, in changing, reduces to one of the 
forms of the elements . . .! 

Many other things remain for me to explain here, and I would myself 
be happy to add several arguments to make my opinions more plausible. 
But in order to make this long discourse less boring for you, I want to 
clothe part of it in the guise of a fable, in the course of which I hope the 
truth will not fail to become sufficiently clear, and will be no less pleasing 
to see than if I were to set it forth wholly naked. 


Chapter 6 Description of anew world; and the qualities of 
the matter of which it is composed 


For a while, then, allow your thought to wander beyond this world to 
view another world — a wholly new one which I shall bring into being 
before your mind in imaginary spaces. The philosophers tell us that such 
spaces are infinite, and they should certainly be believed, since it is they 
themselves who invented them. But in order to keep this infinity from 
hampering and confusing us, let us not try to go right to the end: let us 
enter it only far enough to lose sight of all the creatures that God made 
five or six thousand years ago; and after stopping in some definite place, 
let us suppose that God creates anew so much matter all around us that 
in whatever direction our imagination may extend, it no longer perceives 
any place which is empty. 

Even though the sea is not infinite, people on some vessel in the middle 
of it may stretch their view seemingly to infinity; and yet there is more 
water beyond what they see. Likewise, although our imagination seems 
able to stretch to infinity, and this new matter is not supposed to be 
infinite, yet we can suppose that it fills spaces much greater than all those 
we have imagined. And just to ensure that this supposition contains 
nothing you might find objectionable, let us not allow our imagination to 
extend as far as it could; let us intentionally confine it to a determinate 
space which is no greater, say, than the distance between the earth and 
the principal stars in the heavens, and let us suppose that the matter 
which God has created extends indefinitely far beyond in all directions. 
For it is much more reasonable to prescribe limits to the action of our 
mind than to the works of God, and we are much better able to do so. 

Now since we are taking the liberty of fashioning this matter as we 
fancy, let us attribute to it, if we may, a nature in which there is 
absolutely nothing that everyone cannot know as perfectly as possible. 


1 Descartes goes on to show why the bodies about us must be ‘mixed’, or composed of 
parts of the three elements. He likens these bodies to sponges, their ‘pores’ being filled 
with parts of the first and second elements, which cannot be perceived by the senses. Cf. 
Principles, Part 2, art. 6, p. 225 below. 


The World 91 


To this end, let us expressly suppose that it does not have the form of 
earth, fire, or air, or any other more specific form, like that of wood, 
stone, or metal. Let us also suppose that it lacks the qualities of being hot 
or cold, dry or moist, light or heavy, and of having any taste, smell, 
sound, colour, light, or other such quality in the nature of which there 
might be said to be something which is not known clearly by everyone. 

On the other hand, let us not also think that this matter is the ‘prime 
matter’ of the philosophers, which they have stripped so thoroughly of all 
its forms and qualities that nothing remains in it which can be clearly 
understood. Let us rather conceive it as a real, perfectly solid body which 
uniformly fills the entire length, breadth and depth of this huge space in 
the midst of which we have brought our mind to rest. Thus, each of its 
parts always occupies a part of that space which it fits so exactly that it 
could neither fill a larger one nor squeeze into a smaller; nor could it, 
while remaining there, allow another body to find a place there. 

Let us add that this matter may be divided into as many parts having as 
many shapes as we can imagine, and that each of its parts is capable of 
taking on as many motions as we can conceive. Let us suppose, 
moreover, that God really divides it into many such parts, some larger 
and some smaller, some of one shape and some of another, however we 
care to imagine them. It is not that God separates these parts from one 
another so that there is some void between them: rather, let us regard the 
differences he creates within this matter as consisting wholly in the 
diversity of the motions he gives to its parts. From the first instant of their 
creation, he causes some to start moving in one direction and others in 
another, some faster and others slower (or even, if you wish, not at all); 
and he causes them to continue moving thereafter in accordance with the 
ordinary laws of nature. For God has established these laws in such a 
marvellous way that even if we suppose he creates nothing beyond what | 
have mentioned, and sets up no order or proportion within it but 
composes from it a chaos as confused and muddled as any the poets 
could describe, the laws of nature are sufficient to cause the parts of this 
chaos to disentangle themselves and arrange themselves in such good 
order that they will have the form of a quite perfect world — a world in 
which we shall be able to see not only light but also all the other things, 
general as well as particular, which appear in the real world. 

But before | explain this at greater length, pause again for a bit to 
consider this chaos, and observe that it contains nothing which you do 
not know so perfectly that you could not even pretend to be ignorant of 
it. For, as regards the qualities I have put into it, you may have noticed 
that I supposed them to be only of such a kind that you could imagine 
them. And, as regards the matter from which | have composed it, there 
is nothing simpler or easier to know in inanimate creatures. The idea 


34 


35 


36 


37 


oo The World 


of this matter is included to such an extent in all the ideas that our 
imagination can form that you must necessarily conceive it or else you 
can never imagine anything at all. 

Nevertheless, the philosophers are so subtle that they can find difficul- 
ties in things which seem extremely clear to other men, and the memory 
of their ‘prime matter’, which they know to be rather hard to conceive, 
may divert them from knowledge of the matter of which I am speaking. 
Thus I must tell them at this point that, unless I am mistaken, the whole 
difficulty they face with their matter arises simply from their wanting to 
distinguish it from its own quantity and from its external extension — that 
is, from the property it has of occupying space. In this, however, I am 
quite willing for them to think they are right, for I have no intention of 
stopping to contradict them. But they should also not find it strange if I 
suppose that the quantity of the matter I have described does not differ 
from its substance any more than number differs from the things 
numbered. Nor should they find it strange if I conceive its extension, or 
the property it has of occupying space, not as an accident, but as its true 
form and essence. For they cannot deny that it can be conceived quite 
easily in this way. And my purpose is not to explain, as they do, the 
things which are in fact in the real world, but only to make up, as | 
please, a world in which there is nothing that the dullest minds are 
incapable of conceiving, and which nevertheless could be created exactly 
as I have imagined it. 

Were I to put into this new world the least thing that is obscure, this 
obscurity might well conceal some hidden contradiction | had not 
perceived, and hence, without thinking, I might be supposing something 
impossible. Instead, since everything I propose here can be distinctly 
imagined, it is certain that even if there were nothing of this sort in the 
old world, God can nevertheless create it in a new one. For it is certain 
that he can create everything we can imagine. 


Chapter7 The laws of nature of this new world 


But I do not want to delay any longer telling you by what means nature 
alone can untangle the confusion of the chaos of which I have spoken, 
and what the laws are that God has imposed on it. 

Note, in the first place, that by ‘nature’ here I do not mean some 
goddess or any other sort of imaginary power. Rather, I am using this 
word to signify matter itself, in so far as | am considering it taken 
together with all the qualities 1 have attributed to it, and under the 
condition that God continues to preserve it in the same way that he 
created it. For it follows of necessity, from the mere fact that he continues 


The World 93 


thus to preserve it, that there must be many changes in its parts which 
cannot, it seems to me, properly be attributed to the action of God 
(because that action never changes), and which therefore I attribute to 
nature. The rules by which these changes take place I call the ‘laws of 
nature’. 

In order to understand this better, recall that among the qualities of 
matter, we have supposed that its parts have had various different 
motions from the moment they were created, and furthermore that they 
are all in contact with each other on all sides without there being any 
void between any two of them. From this it follows necessarily that from 
the time they began to move, they also began to change and diversify 
their motions by colliding with one another. So if God subsequently 
preserves them in the same way that he created them, he does not 
preserve them in the same state. That is to say, with God always acting in 
the same way and consequently always producing substantially the same 
effect, there are, as if by accident, many differences in this effect. And it is 
easy to accept that God, who is, as everyone must know, immutable, 
always acts in the same way. But without involving myself any further in 
these metaphysical considerations, I shall set out two or three of the 
principal rules according to which it must be thought that God causes the 
nature of this new world to operate. These, I believe, will suffice to 
acquaint you with all the others. 

The first is that each individual part of matter continues always to be in 
the same state so long as collision with others does not force it to change 
that state. That is to say, if the part has some size, it will never become 
smaller unless others divide it; if it is round or square, it will never change 
that shape unless others force it to; if it is brought to rest in some place, it 
will never leave that place unless others drive it out; and if it has once 
begun to move, it will always continue with an equal force until others 
stop or retard it.! 

There is no one who does not believe that this same rule holds in the 
old world with respect to size, shape, rest and numerous other such 
things. But the philosophers have excluded motion from the rule — which 
is just the thing I most definitely wish to include in it. Do not think, 
however, that I intend to contradict them: the motion they speak of is so 
very different from the one I conceive that it may very easily happen that 
what is true of the one is not true of the other. 

They admit themselves that the nature of their motion is very little 
understood. To render it in some way intelligible they have not yet been 
able to explain it more clearly than in these terms: Motus est actus entis in 


1 See Principles, Part 2, art. 37 (below, p. 240) for Descartes’ later formulation of this law. 


38 


39 


40 


41 


94 The World 


potentia, prout in potentia est.' For me these words are so obscure that | 
am compelled to leave them in Latin because I cannot interpret them. 
(And in fact the sentence ‘Motion is the actuality of a potential being in 
so far as it is potential’ is no clearer for being translated.) By contrast, 
the nature of the motion I mean to speak of here is so easy to know that 
the geometers themselves, who among all men are the most concerned to 
conceive very distinctly the things they study, have judged it simpler and 
more intelligible than the nature of their surfaces and lines — as is shown 
by the fact that they have explained ‘line’ as the motion of a point and 
‘surface’ as the motion of a line. 

The philosophers also posit many motions which they think can take 
place without any body’s changing place, like those they call motus ad 
formam, motus ad calorem, motus ad quantitatem (‘motion with respect 
to form’, ‘motion with respect to heat’, ‘motion with respect to quantity’) 
and numerous others. For my part, I am not acquainted with any 
motion except that which is easier to conceive than the lines of the 
geometers — the motion which makes bodies pass from one place to 
another and successively occupy all the spaces which exist in between. 

In addition, the philosophers attribute to the least of these motions a 
being much more solid and real than they attribute to rest, which they say 
is nothing but the privation of motion. For my part, I conceive of rest as a 
quality too, which should be attributed to matter while it remains in one 
place, just as motion is a quality attributed to matter while it is changing 
place. 

Finally, the motion of which they speak has a very strange nature; for 
whereas all other things have their perfection as an end and strive only to 
preserve themselves, it has no other end and no other goal than rest and, 
contrary to all the laws of nature, it strives of its own accord to destroy 
itself. By contrast, the motion which I posit follows the same laws of 
nature as do generally all the dispositions and qualities found in matter — 
including those which the Schoolmen call modos et entia rationis cum 
fundamento in re (‘conceptual modes and entities founded in things’) as 
well as those they call qualitates reales (their ‘real qualities’, in which I 
confess frankly that I can find no more reality than in the others). 

I suppose as a second rule that when one body pushes another it 
cannot give the other any motion unless it loses as much of its own 
motion at the same time; nor can it take away any of the other’s motion 
unless its own is increased by as much.’ This rule, together with the 


1 Aristotle, Physics, 111, 1, 201210. Descartes criticizes this definition also in Rule Twelve 
of the Rules (see above, p. 49). 

2 See Principles, part 2, art. 40 (below, p. 242) where this appears as the third law of 
nature. 


The World 95 


preceding, agrees very well with all the observations in which we see one 
body begin or cease to move because it is pushed or stopped by another 
one. For, having supposed the preceding rule, we are free from the 
difficulty in which the Schoolmen find themselves when they wish to 
explain why a stone continues to move for some time after leaving the 
hand of the one who threw it. For we should ask, instead, why does the 
stone not continue to move forever? Yet the reason is easy to give. For 
who can deny that the air in which it is moving offers it some resistance? 
We hear it whistle when it cuts through the air; and if a fan, or some 
other very light and extensive body, is moved through the air, we shall 
even be able to feel by the weight in our hand that the air is impeding its 
motion rather than keeping it moving, as some have wanted to say. But 
suppose we refuse to explain the effects of the air’s resistance in 
accordance with our second rule, and we think that the more resistance a 
body can offer the greater its capacity to check the motion of other bodies 
(as perhaps we might be persuaded at first). In this case we shall have 
great difficulty explaining why the motion of the stone is reduced more in 
colliding with a soft body which offers moderate resistance than when it 
collides with a harder body which resists it more. Likewise, we shall find 
it difficult to explain why, as soon as it has encountered some resistance 
in the latter, it immediately turns in its tracks rather than stopping or 
interrupting its motion on that account. On the other hand, if we accept 
this rule, there is no difficulty at all. For it tells us that the motion of one 
body is retarded by its collision with another not in proportion to how 
much the latter resists it, but only in proportion to how much the latter’s 
resistance is overcome, and to the extent that the latter obeys the rule by 
taking on the force of motion that the former gives up. 

Now, in most of the motions we see in the real world we cannot 
perceive that the bodies which begin or cease to move are pushed or 
stopped by some other bodies. But that gives us no reason to think that 
these two rules are not being followed exactly. For it is certain that such 
bodies can often receive their agitation from the two elements, air and 
fire, which are always present among them without being perceivable by 
the senses (as has just been said), or they may receive it even from the 
ordinary air, which also cannot be perceived by the senses. It is certain 
too that they can transfer this agitation sometimes to the ordinary air, 
and sometimes to the whole mass of the earth; and when dispersed in the 
latter, it also cannot be perceived. 

But even if everything our senses ever experienced in the real world 
seemed manifestly contrary to what is contained in these two rules, the 
reasoning which has taught them to me seems so strong that I cannot 
help believing myself obliged to posit them in the new world I am 


42 


43 


44 


45 


96 The World 


describing to you. For what more firm and solid foundation could one 
find for establishing a truth, even if one wished to choose it at will, than 
the very firmness and immutability which is in God? 

So it is that these two rules follow manifestly from the mere fact that 
God is immutable and that, acting always in the same way, he always 
produces the same effect. For, supposing that God placed a certain 
quantity of motion in all matter in general at the first instant he created 
it, we must either admit that he always preserves the same amount of 
motion in it, or not believe that he always acts in the same way. Suppose, 
in addition, that from this first instant the various parts of matter, in 
which these motions are found unequally dispersed, began to retain them 
or transfer them from one to another, according as they had the force to 
do so. Then we must necessarily think that God causes them to continue 
always doing so. And that is what these two rules contain. 

I shall add, as a third rule, that when a body is moving, even though its 
motion for the most part takes place along a curved path and, as we said 
above, it can never make any movement which is not in some way 
circular, yet each of its parts individually tends always to continue 
moving along a straight line.! And so the action of these parts — i.e. the 
tendency they have to move — is different from their motion. 

For example, if we make a wheel turn on its axle, even though all its 
parts go in a circle (because, being joined to one another, they cannot do 
otherwise), their tendency is to go straight ahead. This is obvious if one 
part happens to get detached from the others, for as soon as it is free its 
motion ceases to be circular and continues in a straight line. 

Likewise, when you swing a stone in a sling, not only does it fly 
straight out as soon as it leaves the sling, but also while it is in the sling it 
presses against the middle of it and causes the cord to stretch. This makes 
it obvious that it always has a tendency to go in a straight line and that it 
goes in a circle only under constraint. 

This rule is based on the same foundation as the other two: it depends 
solely on God’s preserving each thing by a continuous action, and 
consequently on his preserving it not as it may have been some time 
earlier but precisely as it is at the very instant that he preserves it. So it is 
that of all motions, only motion in a straight line is entirely simple and 
has a nature which may be wholly grasped in an instant. For in order to 
conceive such motion it suffices to think that a body is in the process of 
moving in a certain direction, and that this is the case at each determin- 
able instant during the time it is moving. By contrast, in order to conceive 
circular motion, or any other possible motion, it is necessary to consider 


1 See Principles, Part 2, art. 39, p. 241 below. 


The World 97 


at least two of its instants, or rather two of its parts, and the relation 
between them. But so that the philosophers (or rather the sophists) do 
not find occasion here to exercise their useless subtleties, note that I am 
not saying that rectilinear motion can take place in an instant, but only 
that everything required to produce it is present in bodies at each instant 
which might be determined while they are moving, whereas not every- 
thing required to produce circular motion is present ... 

According to this rule, then, it must be said that God alone is the 
author of all the motions in the world in so far as they exist and in so far 
as they are rectilinear; but it is the various dispositions of matter which 
render them irregular and curved. Likewise, the theologians teach us that 
God is also the author of all our actions, in so far as they exist and in so 
far as they have some goodness, but it is the various dispositions of our 
wills that can render them evil. 

I could set out many further rules here for determining in detail when, 
how, and by how much the motion of each body can be changed and 
increased or decreased by colliding with others — in sum, rules which 
comprehend in a concise way all the effects of nature. But I shall be 
content with telling you that apart from the three laws I have expounded, 
I do not wish to suppose any others but those which follow inevitably 
from the eternal truths on which mathematicians have usually based 
their most certain and most evident demonstrations — the truths, I say, 
according to which God himself has taught us that he has arranged all 
things in number, weight and measure. The knowledge of these truths 
is so natural to our souls that we cannot but judge them infallible 
when we conceive them distinctly, nor doubt that if God had created 
many worlds, they would be as true in each of them as in this one. Thus 
those who are able to examine sufficiently the consequences of these 
truths and of our rules will be able to recognize effects by their causes. 
To express myself in scholastic terms, they will able to have a 
priori demonstrations of everything that can be produced in this new 
world. 

In order to eliminate any exception that may prevent this, we shall, if 
you please, suppose in addition that God will never perform any miracle 
in the new world, and that the intelligences, or the rational souls, which 
we might later suppose to be there, will not disrupt in any way the 
ordinary course of nature. In consequence of this, however, I do not 
promise to set out exact demonstrations of everything I shall say. It will 
be enough if I open the way which will enable you to discover them 
yourselves, when you take the trouble to look for them. Most minds lose 
interest when things are made too easy for them. And to present a picture 
which pleases you, I need to use shadow as well as bright colours. So | 


47 


48 


98 


The World 


shall be content to continue with the description I have begun, as if my 
intention was simply to tell you a fable.' 


1 The remaining chapters of The World deal with topics indicated in the chapter headings: 


Chapter 8 
Chapter 9 


Chapter 10 
Chapter 11 
Chapter 12 
Chapter 13 
Chapter 14 
Chapter 15 


The formation of the sun and the stars in this new world. 

The origin and course of the planets and comets in general; and of 
comets in particular. 

The planets in general; and the earth and moon in particular. 
Weight. 

The ebb and flow of the tides. 

Light. 

The properties of light. 

Why the face of the heaven of this new world must appear to its 
inhabitants entirely like that of our world. 


TREATISE ON MAN 


These men will be composed, as we are, of a soul and a body.! First I 
must describe the body on its own; then the soul, again on its own; and 
finally I must show how these two natures would have to be joined and 
united in order to constitute men who resemble us. 

I suppose the body to be nothing but a statue or machine made of 
earth,’ which God forms with the explicit intention of making it as much 
as possible like us. Thus God not only gives it externally the colours and 
shapes of all the parts of our bodies, but also places inside it all the parts 
required to make it walk, eat, breathe, and indeed to imitate all those of 
our functions which can be imagined to proceed from matter and to 
depend solely on the disposition of our organs. 

We see clocks, artificial fountains, mills, and other such machines 
which, although only man-made, have the power to move of their own 
accord in many different ways. But I am supposing this machine to be 
made by the hands of God, and so | think you may reasonably think it 
capable of a greater variety of movements than I could possibly imagine 
in it, and of exhibiting more artistry than I could possibly ascribe to it. 

Now I shall not pause to describe the bones, nerves, muscles, veins, 
arteries, stomach, liver, spleen, heart, brain, or any of the various other 
parts from which this machine must be composed. For I am supposing 
that they are entirely like the parts of our own bodies which have the 
same names, and I| assume that if you do not already have sufficient 
first-hand knowledge of them, you can get a learned anatomist to show 
them to you — at any rate, those which are large enough to be seen with 
the naked eye. As for the parts which are too small to be seen, I can 
inform you about them more easily and clearly by speaking of the 
movements which depend on them. Thus I need only give an orderly 


1 By ‘these men’, Descartes means the fictional men he introduced in an earlier (lost) part 
of the work. Their description is intended to cast light on the nature of real men in the 
same way that the description of a ‘new world’ in The World, ch. 6, is intended to cast 
light on the real world. See also Discourse, part 5, pp. 132ff below. 

2 By ‘earth’ Descartes means the third ‘element’, which he had discussed in The World, ch. 
5 (cf. p. 89 above). 


99 


AT XI 


119 


I20 


I21 


129 


(130) 


131 


100 Treatise on Man 


account of these movements in order to tell you which of our functions 
they represent .. .! 

The parts of the blood which penetrate as far as the brain serve not 
only to nourish and sustain its substance, but also and primarily to 
produce in it a certain very fine? wind, or rather a very lively and pure 
flame, which is called the animal spirits. For it must be noted that the 
arteries which carry blood to the brain from the heart, after dividing into 
countless tiny branches which make up the minute tissues that are 
stretched like tapestries at the bottom of the cavities of the brain, come 
together again around a certain little gland? situated near the middle of 
the substance of the brain, right at the entrance to its cavities. The 
arteries in this region have a great many little holes through which the 
finer parts of the blood can flow into this gland ... These parts of the 
blood, without any preparation or alteration except for their separation 
from the coarser parts and their retention of the extreme rapidity which 
the heat of the heart has given them, cease to have the form of blood, and 
are called the ‘animal spirits’. 

Now in the same proportion as the animal spirits enter the cavities of 
the brain, they pass from there into the pores of its substance, and from 
these pores into the nerves. And depending on the varying amounts 
which enter (or merely tend to enter) some nerves more than others, the 
spirits have the power to change the shape of the muscles in which the 
nerves are embedded, and by this means to move all the limbs. Similarly 
you may have observed in the grottos and fountains in the royal gardens 
that the mere force with which the water is driven as it emerges from its 
source is sufficient to move various machines, and even to make them 
play certain instruments or utter certain words depending on the various 
arrangements of the pipes through which the water is conducted. 

Indeed, one may compare the nerves of the machine I am describing 
with the pipes in the works of these fountains, its muscles and tendons 
with the various devices and springs which serve to set them in motion, 
its animal spirits with the water which drives them, the heart with the 
source of the water, and the cavities of the brain with the storage tanks. 
Moreover, breathing and other such activities which are normal and 


1 There follows a description of digestion, the formation and circulation of the blood, the 
action of the heart, and respiration. Cf. Discourse, part 5, pp. 132ff below, and Passions, 
Part 1, art. 3-10, pp. 329ff, and Description of the Human Body, pp. 316ff, below. For 
an English version of material omitted here and below, see Descartes: Treatise on Man, 
tr. T. S. Hall (Cambridge: Harvard U.P., 1972). 

2 Fr. subtil, by which Descartes means ‘composed of very small, fast-moving particles’. 

3 The pineal gland, which Descartes later identifies as the seat of the imagination and the 
‘common’ sense (p. 106 below). See also Passions (pp. 340ff, below), where the gland is 
identified as the seat of the soul. 


Treatise on Man Io} 


natural to this machine, and which depend on thé{tlow ot thre spirits, are 
like the movements of a clock or mill, which th#emmRe-Hew-ofwater 
can render continuous. External objects, which by their mere presence 
stimulate its sense organs and thereby cause them to move in many 
different ways depending on how the parts of its brain are disposed, are 
like visitors who enter the grottos of these fountains and unwittingly 
cause the movements which take place before their eyes. For they cannot 
enter without stepping on certain tiles which are so arranged that if, for 
example, they approach a Diana who is bathing they will cause her to 
hide in the reeds, and if they move forward to pursue her they will cause a 
Neptune to advance and threaten them with his trident; or if they go in 
another direction they will cause a sea-monster to emerge and spew 
water onto their faces; or other such things according to the whim of the 
engineers who made the fountains. And finally, when a rational soul is 
present in this machine it will have its principal seat in the brain, and 
reside there like the fountain-keeper who must be stationed at the tanks 
to which the fountain’s pipes return if he wants to produce, or prevent, or 
change their movements in some way .. .! 

Next, to understand how the external objects which strike the sense 
organs can prompt this machine to move its limbs in numerous different 
ways, you should consider that the tiny fibres (which, as I have already 
told you, come from the innermost region of its brain and compose the 
marrow of the nerves) are so arranged in each part of the machine that 
serves as the organ of some sense that they can easily be moved by the 
objects of that sense. And when they are moved, with however little 
force, they simultaneously pull the parts of the brain from which they 
come, and thereby open the entrances to certain pores in the internal 
surface of the brain. Through these pores the animal spirits in the 
cavities of the brain immediately begin to make their way into the 
nerves and so to the muscles which serve to cause movements in the 
machine quite similar to those we are naturally prompted to make when 
our senses are affected in the same way. 

Thus, for example [in Fig. 1], if fire A is close to foot B, the tiny parts of 
this fire (which, as you know, move about very rapidly) have the power 
also to move the area of skin which they touch. In this way they pull the 
tiny fibre cc which you see attached to it, and simultaneously open the 
entrance to the pore de, located opposite the point where this fibre 
terminates—just as when you pull one end of a string, you cause a bell 
hanging at the other end to ring at the same time. 

When the entrance to the pore or small tube de is opened in this way, 


1 There follows a description of the way in which the animal spirits bring about muscular 
movements, breathing, swallowing, etc. See Passions, Part 1, pp. 334ff below. 


132 


(141) 


142 


Io2 


Treatise on Man 103 


pulled in this way, the fibres cause a movement in the brain which gives 
occasion for the soul (whose place of residence must remain constant) to 
have the sensation of pain. 

Now suppose the fibres are pulled with a force almost as great as the 
one just mentioned, but without their being broken or separated from the 
parts to which they are attached. Then they will cause a movement in the 
brain which, testifying to the good condition of the other parts of the 
body, will give the soul occasion to feel a certain bodily pleasure which 
we call ‘titillation’. This, as you see, is very close to pain in respect of its 
cause but quite opposite in its effect. 

Again, if many of these tiny fibres are pulled equally and all together, 
they will make the soul perceive that the surface of the body touching the 
limb where they terminate is smooth; and if the fibres are pulled 
unequally they will make the soul feel the surface to be uneven and 
rough. 

And if the fibres are disturbed only slightly and separately from one 
another, as they constantly are by the heat which the heart transmits to 
the other parts of the body, the soul will have no more sensation of this 
than of any other normal function of the body. But if this stimulation is 
increased or decreased by some unusual cause, its increase will make the 
soul have a sensation of heat, and its decrease a sensation of cold. Finally, 
according to the various other ways in which they are stimulated, the 
fibres will cause the soul to perceive all the other qualities belonging to 
touch in general, such as moisture, dryness, weight and the like. « 

It must be observed, however, that despite the extreme thinness and 
mobility of these fibres, they are not thin and mobile enough to transmit 
to the brain all the more subtle motions that take place in nature. In fact 
the slightest motions they transmit are ones involving the coarser parts of 
terrestrial bodies. And even among these bodies there may be some 
whose parts, although rather coarse, can slide against the fibres so gently 
that they compress them or cut right through them without their action 
passing to the brain. In just the same way there are certain drugs which 
have the power to numb or even destroy the parts of the body to which 
they are applied without causing us to have any sensation of them at 
all...! 

It is time for me to begin to explain how the animal spirits make their 
way through the cavities and pores of the brain of this machine, and 
which of the machine’s functions depend on these spirits. 


1 There follows an account of the other external senses (taste, smell, hearing and sight) and 
of internal sensations (hunger, thirst, joy and sadness). For Descartes’ theory of vision, 
see Optics (pp. 167ff below), for the other external senses, see Principles, Part 4, art. 
192-4 (pp. 282ff below) and for the internal sensations, see Passions, passim. 


145 


166 


(173) 


104 Treatise on Man 


If you have ever had the curiosity to examine the organs in our 
churches, you know how the bellows push the air into certain receptacles 
(which are called, presumably for this reason, wind-chests). And you 
know how the air passes from there into one or other of the pipes, 
depending on the different ways in which the organist moves his fingers 
on the keyboard. You can think of our machine’s heart and arteries, 
which push the animal spirits into the cavities of its brain, as being like 
the bellows of an organ, which push air into the wind-chests; and you 
can think of external objects, which stimulate certain nerves and cause 
spirits contained in the cavities to pass into some of the pores, as being 
like the fingers of the organist, which press certain keys and cause the air 
to pass from the wind-chests into certain pipes. Now the harmony of an 
organ does not depend on the externally visible arrangement of the pipes 
or on the shape of the wind-chests or other parts. It depends solely on 
three factors: the air which comes from the bellows, the pipes which 
make the sound, and the distribution of the air in the pipes. In just the 
same way, I would point out, the functions we are concerned with here 
do not depend at all on the external shape of the visible parts which 
anatomists distinguish in the substance of the brain, or on the shape of 
the brain’s cavities, but solely on three factors: the spirits which come 
from the heart, the pores of the brain through which they pass, and the 
way in which the spirits are distributed in these pores. Thus my sole task 
here is to give an orderly account of the most important features of these 
three factors .. .! 

Now, the substance of the brain being soft and pliant, its cavities 
would be very narrow and almost all closed (as they appear in the brain 
of a corpse) if no spirits entered them. But the source which produces 
these spirits is usually so abundant that they enter these cavities in 
sufficient quantity to have the force to push out against the surrounding 
matter and make it expand, thus tightening all the tiny nerve-fibres which 
come from it (in the way that a moderate wind can inflate the sails of a 
ship and tighten all the ropes to which the sails are attached.) It follows 
that at such times the machine is disposed to respond to all the actions of 
the spirits, and hence it represents the body of a man who is awake. Or at 
least the spirits have enough force to push against some parts of the 
surrounding matter in this way, and so make it tight, while the other 
parts remain free and relaxed (as happens in parts of a sail when the wind 
is a little too weak to fill it). At such times the machine represents the 
body of a man who is asleep and who has various dreams as he sleeps. . . 


1 There follows a description of the animal spirits and how their state is affected by 
digestion, respiration, and other bodily functions; of the pores of the brain; and of the 
movement of the spirits through the pores. 


Treatise on Man 105 


But before I speak in greater detail about sleep and dreams, | must have 
you consider the most noteworthy events that take place in the brain 
during the time of waking: namely, how ideas of objects are formed in 
the place assigned to the imagination and to the ‘common’ sense,' how 
the ideas are retained in the memory, and how they cause movement in 
all the parts of the body... 

In order ... to see clearly how ideas are formed of the objects which 
strike the senses, observe in this diagram [Fig. 2] the tiny fibres 12, 34, 
56, and the like, which make up the optic nerve and stretch from the back 
of the eye at 1, 3, 5 to the internal surface of the brain at 2, 4, 6. Now 
assume that these fibres are so arranged that if the rays coming, for 
example, from point A of the object happen to press upon the back of the 
eye at point 1, they pull the whole of fibre 12 and enlarge the opening of 
the tiny tube marked 2. In the same way, the rays which come from point 
B enlarge the opening of the tiny tube 4, and likewise for the others. We 
have already described how, depending on the different ways in which 
the points 1, 3, 5 are pressed by these rays, a figure is traced on the back 


Fig. 2 


of the eye corresponding to that of the object ABC. Similarly, it is 
obvious that, depending on the different ways in which the tiny tubes 2, 
4, 6 are opened by the fibres 12, 34, 56, etc., a corresponding figure must 
also be traced on the internal surface of the brain. 

Suppose next that the spirits which tend to enter each of the tiny tubes 
2, 4, 6, and the like, do not come indifferently from all points on the 
surface of gland H, but only from certain of these points: those coming 
from point a on this surface, for example, tend to enter tube 2, those 
from points b and c tend to enter tubes 4 and 6, and likewise for the 


1 See footnote 1, p. 41 above. 


(174) 


175 


176 


177 


106 Treatise on Man 


others. As a result, at the same instant that the openings to these tubes 
expand, the spirits begin to leave the corresponding points on the gland 
more freely and more rapidly than they did previously. Thus, just as a 
figure corresponding to that of the object ABC is traced on the internal 
surface of the brain according to the different ways in which tubes 2, 4, 6 
are opened, likewise that figure is traced on the surface of the gland 
according to the ways in which the spirits leave from points a, b, c. 

And note that by ‘figures’ I mean not only things which somehow 
represent the position of the edges and surfaces of objects, but also 
anything which, as I said above, can give the soul occasion to perceive 
movement, size, distance, colours, sounds, smells and other such qual- 
ities. And I also include anything that can make the soul feel pleasure, 
pain, hunger, thirst, joy, sadness and other such passions. For it is easy to 
understand that tube 2, for example, may be opened in different ways— 
in one way by the action which I said causes sensory perception of the 
colour red, or of tickling, and in another way by the action which I said 
causes sensory perception of the colour white, or of pain; and the spirits 
which leave from point a will tend to move towards this tube in a 
different manner according to differences in its manner of opening, and 
likewise for the others. 

Now among these figures, it is not those imprinted on the external 
sense organs, or on the internal surface of the brain, which should be 
taken to be ideas — but only those which are traced in the spirits on the 
surface of the gland H (where the seat of the imagination and the 
‘common’ sense is located).' That is to say, it is only the latter figures 
which should be taken to be the forms or images which the rational soul 
united to this machine will consider directly when it imagines some 
object or perceives it by the senses. 

And note that I say ‘imagines or perceives by the senses’. For I wish to 
apply the term ‘idea’ generally to all the impressions which the spirits can 
receive as they leave gland H. These are to be attributed to the ‘common’ 
sense when they depend on the presence of objects; but they may also 
proceed from many other causes (as I shall explain later), and they should 
then be attributed to the imagination. 

Here I could add something about how the traces of these ideas pass 
through the arteries to the heart, and thus radiate through all the blood; 
and about how certain actions of a mother may sometimes even cause 
such traces to be imprinted on the limbs of the child being formed in her 
womb. But I shall content myself with telling you more about how the 
traces are imprinted on the internal part of the brain [marked B on Fig. 2] 
which is the seat of the memory. 


1 See note 3, p. 100 above. 


Treatise on Man 107 


To this end, suppose that after the spirits leaving gland H have received 
the impression of some idea, they pass through tubes 2, 4, 6, and the like, 
into the pores or gaps lying between the tiny fibres which make up part B 
of the brain. And suppose that the spirits are strong enough to enlarge 
these gaps somewhat, and to bend and arrange in various ways any fibres 
they encounter, according to the various ways in which the spirits are 
moving and the different openings of the tubes into which they pass. 
Thus they also trace figures in these gaps, which correspond to those of 
the objects. At first they do this less easily and perfectly than they do on 
gland H, but gradually they do it better and better, as their action 
becomes stronger and lasts longer, or is repeated more often. That is why 
these figures are no longer so easily erased, and why they are preserved in 
such a way that the ideas which were previously on the gland can be 
formed again long afterwards without requiring the presence of the 
objects to which they correspond. And this is what memory consists 
in...! 

But before going on to describe the rational soul, I should like you 
once again to give a little thought to everything I have said about this 
machine. Consider, in the first place, that I have supposed in it only 
organs and mechanisms of such a type that you may well believe very 
similar ones to be present both in us and in many animals which lack 
reason as well. Regarding those which can be seen clearly with the naked 
eye, the anatomists have already observed them all. And as for what | 
have said about the way in which the arteries carry the spirits into the 
head, and about the difference between the internal surface of the brain 
and its central substance, the anatomists will, if they simply make closer 
observations, be able to see sufficient indications of this to allay any 
doubts about these matters too. Nor will they be able to have doubts 
about the tiny doors or valves which I have placed in the nerves where 
they enter each muscle, if they take care to note that nature generally has 
formed such valves at all the places in our bodies where some matter 
regularly goes in and may tend to come out, as at the entrances to the 
heart, gall-bladder, throat, and large intestine, and at the main divisions 
of all the veins. Again, regarding the brain, they will not be able to 
imagine anything more plausible than that it is composed of many tiny 
fibres variously interlaced; for, in view of the fact that every type of skin 
and flesh appears to be similarly composed of many fibres or threads, and 
that the same thing is observed in all plants, such fibrous composition is 
apparently a common property of all bodies that can grow and be 


1 There follows an account of the way in which the animal spirits form ideas on the surface 
of the pineal gland, and produce bodily movements like those of real men, despite the 
absence of any soul. See Passions, Part 1, art. 13-16, 21-4, pp. 333ff, 336f below. 


178 


(200) 


201 


202 


108 Treatise on Man 


nourished by the union and joining together of the minute parts of other 
bodies. Finally, as for the rest of the things I have assumed which cannot 
be perceived by any sense, they are all so simple and commonplace, and 
also so few in number, that if you compare them with the diverse 
composition and marvellous artistry which is evident in the structure of 
the visible organs, you will have more reason to think I have omitted 
many that are in us than to think I have introduced any that are not. And, 
knowing that nature always acts by the simplest and easiest means, you 
will perhaps conclude that it is possible to find some which are more 
similar to the ones she in fact uses than to those proposed here. 

I should like you to consider, after this, all the functions I have ascribed 
to this machine — such as the digestion of food, the beating of the heart 
and arteries, the nourishment and growth of the limbs, respiration, 
waking and sleeping, the reception by the external sense organs of light, 
sounds, smells, tastes, heat and other such qualities, the imprinting of the 
ideas of these qualities in the organ of the ‘common’ sense and the 
imagination, the retention or stamping of these ideas in the memory, the 
internal movements of the appetites and passions, and finally the 
external movements of all the limbs (movements which are so appropri- 
ate not only to the actions of objects presented to the senses, but also to 
the passions and the impressions found in the memory, that they imitate 
perfectly the movements of a real man). I should like you to consider that 
these functions follow from the mere arrangement of the machine’s 
organs every bit as naturally as the movements of a clock or other 
automaton follow from the arrangement of its counter-weights and 
wheels. In order to explain these functions, then, it is not necessary to 
conceive of this machine as having any vegetative or sensitive soul or 
other principle of movement and life, apart from its blood and its spirits, 
which are agitated by the heat of the fire burning continuously in its 
heart—a fire which has the same nature as all the fires that occur in 
inanimate bodies. 


Discourse and Essays 


Translator’s preface 


Descartes’ first published writings, the Discourse and Essays appeared 
anonymously at Leiden in June 1637, under the full title Discourse on 
the Method of rightly conducting one’s reason and seeking the truth in 
the sciences, and in addition the Optics, the Meteorology and the 
Geometry, which are essays in this Method (Discours de la Méthode 
pour bien conduire sa raison, et chercher la vérité dans les sciences. Plus 
la Dioptrique, les Météores et la Géométrie qui sont des essais de cette 
Méthode). 

This title is an abbreviated form of the more elaborate title that 
Descartes proposed in a letter to Mersenne of March 1636, where he 
speaks of ‘four treatises, all in French, with the general title: The Plan of 
a universal Science which is capable of raising our nature to its highest 
degree of perfection. In addition, the Optics, the Meteorology and the 
Geometry, in which the Author, in order to give proof of his universal 
Science, explains the most abstruse Topics he could choose, and does so 
in such a way that even persons who have never studied can understand 
them.’ When Mersenne raised questions about the title of the published 
work, Descartes replied (in a letter of February 1637): 


I have not put Treatise on the Method but Discourse on the Method, which 
amounts to the same as Preface or Note concerning the Method, in order to show 
that I do not intend to teach the method but only to speak about it. For, as can be 
seen from what I say, it consists much more in practice than in theory. I call the 
treatises following it Essays in this Method because I claim that what they contain 
could not have been discovered without it, and they enable us to recognize its 
value. And I have included a certain amount of metaphysics, physics and 
medicine in the introductory Discourse in order to show that the method extends 
to every kind of subject-matter. 


The Essays were all written or conceived well before the Discourse. 
Thus, Descartes announces his intention to write the Meteorology in a 
letter to Mersenne of 8 October 1629, and in the same letter he also 
indicates his wish to publish anonymously, with the author ‘hidden 
behind the picture so as to hear what is said of it’. The Optics is 
mentioned in a letter of 1630, and Descartes sent a part of it (probably 


109 


110 Discourse and Essays 


the section on refraction) to a correspondent in 1632. He refers to it in 
The World, which was completed in 1633, and in 1635 he showed it to 
Huygens, to whom he wrote in November of his plan to publish the 
Meteorology with the Optics, and to add to them a ‘preface’. As for the 
Geometry, Descartes claimed (in a letter of 22 February 1638) that it was 
written out, and even in part devised, while the Meteorology was being 
printed (i.e. in the spring of 1636). But he also maintains that he had 
known one of its results ‘for twenty years’ (letter to Mersenne, 29 June 
1638), and his correspondence confirms that the Geometry contains 
discoveries made prior to 1630. 

In 1644 a Latin translation of the Discourse and Essays (omitting the 
Geometry) was published at Amsterdam. This translation incorporates 
changes made by Descartes himself, but none of them indicates any 
important modification of his philosophical views. Hence the present 
translation, which comprises the whole of the Discourse and substantial 
excerpts from the Optics, follows only Adam and Tannery’s edition of 
the French original.! 

R.S. 


1 See General Introduction, p. x above. 


DISCOURSE ON THE METHOD 


of rightly conducting one’s reason and seeking the truth in 
the sciences 


If this discourse seems too long to be read at a sitting you may divide it 
into six parts. In the first you will find various considerations regarding 
the sciences; in the second, the principal rules of the method which the 
author has sought; in the third, some of the moral rules he has derived 
from this method; in the fourth, the arguments by which he proves the 
existence of God and the human soul, which are the foundations of his 
metaphysics; in the fifth, the order of the questions in physics that he has 
investigated, particularly the explanation of the movement of the heart 
and of some other difficulties pertaining to medicine, and also the 
difference between our soul and that of the beasts; and in the last, the 
things he believes necessary in order to make further progress in the 
investigation of nature than he has made, and the reasons which made 
him write this discourse. 


Part One 


Good sense is the best distributed thing in the world: for everyone thinks 
himself so well endowed with it that even those who are the hardest to 
please in everything else do not usually desire more of it than they 
possess. In this it is unlikely that everyone is mistaken. It indicates rather 
that the power of judging well and of distinguishing the true from the 
false — which is what we properly call ‘good sense’ or ‘reason’ — is 
naturally equal in all men, and consequently that the diversity of our 
opinions does not arise because some of us are more reasonable than 
others but solely because we direct our thoughts along different paths 
and do not attend to the same things. For it is not enough to have a good 
mind; the main thing is to apply it well. The greatest souls are capable of 
the greatest vices as well as the greatest virtues; and those who proceed 
but very slowly can make much greater progress, if they always follow 
the right path, than those who hurry and stray from it. 

For my part, | have never presumed my mind to be in any way more 
perfect than that of the ordinary man; indeed, I have often wished to 
have as quick a wit, or as sharp and distinct an imagination, or as ample 


III 


AT VI 


I 


I12 Discourse on the Method 


Or prompt a memory as some others. And apart from these, I know of no 
other qualities which serve to perfect the mind; for, as regards reason or 
sense, since it is the only thing that makes us men and distinguishes us 
from the beasts, I am inclined to believe that it exists whole and complete 
in each of us. Here I follow the common opinion of the philosophers, 
who say there are differences of degree only between the accidents, and 
not between the forms (or natures) of individuals of the same species. 

But I say without hesitation that I consider myself very fortunate to 
have happened upon certain paths in my youth which led me to 
considerations and maxims from which I formed a method whereby, 
it seems to me, I can increase my knowledge gradually and raise it little 
by little to the highest point allowed by the mediocrity of my mind and 
the short duration of my life. Now I always try to lean towards 
diffidence rather than presumption in the judgements I make about 
myself; and when I cast a philosophical eye upon the various activities 
and undertakings of mankind, there are almost none which I do not 
consider vain and useless. Nevertheless I have already reaped such fruits 
from this method that I cannot but feel extremely satisfied with the 
progress I think I have already made in the search for truth, and I cannot 
but entertain such hopes for the future as to venture the opinion that if 
any purely human occupation has solid worth and importance, it is the 
one I have chosen. 

Yet I may be wrong: perhaps what I take for gold and diamonds is 
nothing but a bit of copper and glass. I know how much we are liable to 
err in matters that concern us, and also how much the judgements of our 
friends should be distrusted when they are in our favour. I shall be glad, 
nevertheless, to reveal in this discourse what paths I have followed, and 
to represent my life in it as if in a picture, so that everyone may judge it 
for himself; and thus, learning from public response the opinions held of 
it, I shall add a new means of self-instruction to those I am accustomed to 
using. 

My present aim, then, is not to teach the method which everyone must 
follow in order to direct his reason correctly, but only to reveal how I 
have tried to direct my own. One who presumes to give precepts must 
think himself more skilful than those to whom he gives them; and if he 
makes the slightest mistake, he may be blamed. But I am presenting this 
work only as a history or, if you prefer, a fable in which, among certain 
examples worthy of imitation, you will perhaps also find many others 
that it would be right not to follow; and so I hope it will be useful for 
some without being harmful to any, and that everyone will be grateful to 
me for my frankness. 

From my childhood I have been nourished upon letters, and because I 


Part One 113 


was persuaded that by their means one could acquire a clear and certain 
knowledge of all that is useful in life, 1 was extremely eager to learn them. 
But as soon as I had completed the course of study at the end of which 
One is normally admitted to the ranks of the learned, I completely 
changed my opinion. For I found myself beset by so many doubts and 
errors that I came to think I had gained nothing from my attempts to 
become educated but increasing recognition of my ignorance. And yet | 
was at one of the most famous schools in Europe, where I thought there 
must be learned men if they existed anywhere on earth. There I had 
learned everything that the others were learning; moreover, not content 
with the subjects they taught us, I had gone through all the books that fell 
into my hands concerning the subjects that are considered most abstruse 
and unusual. At the same time, I knew how the others judged me, and | 
saw that they did not regard me as inferior to my fellow students, even 
though several among them were already destined to take the place of 
our teachers. And finally, the age in which we live seemed to me to be as 
flourishing, and as rich in good minds, as any before it. This made me feel 
free to judge all others by reference to myself and think there was no 
knowledge in the world such as I had previously been led to hope for. 

I did not, however, cease to value the exercises done in the Schools. I 
knew that the languages learned there are necessary for understanding 
the works of the ancients; that the charm of fables awakens the mind, 
while the memorable deeds told in histories uplift it and help to shape 
one’s judgement if they are read with discretion; that reading good books 
is like having a conversation with the most distinguished men of past ages 
— indeed, a rehearsed conversation in which these authors reveal to us 
only the best of their thoughts; that oratory has incomparable powers 
and beauties; that poetry has quite ravishing delicacy and sweetness; that 
mathematics contains some very subtle devices which serve as much to 
satisfy the curious as to further all the arts and lessen man’s labours; that 
writings on morals contain many very useful teachings and exhortations 
to virtue; that theology instructs us how to reach heaven; that philosophy 
gives us the means of speaking plausibly about any subject and of 
winning the admiration of the less learned; that jurisprudence, medicine, 
and other sciences bring honours and riches to those who cultivate them; 
and, finally, that it is good to have examined all these subjects, even those 
full of superstition and falsehood, in order to know their true value and 
guard against being deceived by them. 

But I thought I had already given enough time to languages and 
likewise to reading the works of the ancients, both their histories and 
their fables. For conversing with those of past centuries is much the same 
as travelling. It is good to know something of the customs of various 


114 Discourse on the Method 


peoples, so that we may judge our own more soundly and not think that 
everything contrary to our own ways is ridiculous and irrational, as those 
who have seen nothing of the world ordinarily do. But one who spends 
too much time travelling eventually becomes a stranger in his own 
country; and one who is too curious about the practices of past ages 
usually remains quite ignorant about those of the present. Moreover, 
fables make us imagine many events as possible when they are not. And 
even the most accurate histories, while not altering or exaggerating the 
importance of matters to make them more worthy of being read, at any 
rate almost always omit the baser and less notable events; as a result, the 
other events appear in a false light, and those who regulate their conduct 
by examples drawn from these works are liable to fall into the excesses of 
the knights-errant in our tales of chivalry, and conceive plans beyond 
their powers. 

I valued oratory and was fond of poetry; but I thought both were 
gifts of the mind rather than fruits of study. Those with the strongest 
reasoning and the most skill at ordering their thoughts so as to make them 
clear and intelligible are always the most persuasive, even if they speak 
only low Breton and have never learned rhetoric. And those with the 
most pleasing conceits and the ability to express them with the most 
embellishment and sweetness would still be the best poets, even if they 
knew nothing of the theory of poetry. 

Above all I delighted in mathematics, because of the certainty and 
self-evidence of its reasonings. But I did not yet notice its real use; and 
since I thought it was of service only in the mechanical arts, I was 
surprised that nothing more exalted had been built upon such firm and 
solid foundations. On the other hand, I compared the moral writings of 
the ancient pagans to very proud and magnificent palaces built only on 
sand and mud. They extol the virtues, and make them appear more 
estimable than anything else in the world; but they do not adequately 
explain how to recognize a virtue, and often what they call by this fine 
name is nothing but a case of callousness, or vanity, or desperation, or 
parricide. 

I revered our theology, and aspired as much as anyone else to reach 
heaven. But having learned as an established fact that the way to heaven 
is open no less to the most ignorant than to the most learned, and that the 
revealed truths which guide us there are beyond our understanding, | 
would not have dared submit them to my weak reasonings; and I thought 
that to undertake an examination of them and succeed, I would need to 
have some extraordinary aid from heaven and to be more than a mere 
man. 

Regarding philosophy, I shall say only this: seeing that it has been 


Part One 115 


cultivated for many centuries by the most excellent minds and yet there is 
still no point in it which is not disputed and hence doubtful, I was not so 
presumptuous as to hope to achieve any more in it than others had done. 
And, considering how many diverse opinions learned men may maintain 
on a single question — even though it is impossible for more than one to 
be true — I held as well-nigh false everything that was merely probable. 

As for the other sciences, in so far as they borrow their principles from 
philosophy I decided that nothing solid could have been built upon such 
shaky foundations. Neither the honour nor the riches they offered was 
enough to induce me to learn them. For my circumstances did not, thanks 
to God, oblige me to augment my fortune by making science my 
profession; and although I did not profess to scorn glory, like a Cynic, yet 
I thought very little of the glory which I could hope to acquire only 
through false pretences. Finally, as for the false sciences, I thought that I 
already knew their worth well enough not to be liable to be deceived by 
the promises of an alchemist or the predictions of an astrologer, the tricks 
of a magician or the frauds and boasts of those who profess to know 
more than they do. 

That is why, as soon as I was old enough to emerge from the control of 
my teachers, I entirely abandoned the study of letters. Resolving to seek 
no knowledge other than that which could be found in myself or else in 
the great book of the world, I spent the rest of my youth travelling, 
visiting courts and armies, mixing with people of diverse temperaments 
and ranks, gathering various experiences, testing myself in the situations 
which fortune offered me, and at all times reflecting upon whatever came 
my way so as to derive some profit from it. For it seemed to me that much 
more truth could be found in the reasonings which a man makes 
concerning matters that concern him than in those which some scholar 
makes in his study about speculative matters. For the consequences of the 
former will soon punish the man if he judges wrongly, whereas the latter 
have no practical consequences and no importance for the scholar except 
that perhaps the further they are from common sense the more pride he 
will take in them, since he will have had to use so much more skill and 
ingenuity in trying to render them plausible. And it was always my most 
earnest desire to learn to distinguish the true from the false in order to see 
clearly into my own actions and proceed with confidence in this life. 

It is true that, so long as I merely considered the customs of other men, 
I found hardly any reason for confidence, for I observed in them almost 
as much diversity as I had found previously among the opinions of 
philosophers. In fact the greatest benefit I derived from these observa- 
tions was that they showed me many things which, although seeming 
very extravagant and ridiculous to us, are nevertheless commonly 


IO 


116 Discourse on the Method 


accepted and approved in other great nations; and so I learned not to 
believe too firmly anything of which I had been persuaded only by 
example and custom. Thus I gradually freed myself from many errors 
which may obscure our natural light and make us less capable of heeding 
reason. But after I had spent some years pursuing these studies in the 
book of the world and trying to gain some experience, I resolved one day 
to undertake studies within myself too and to use all the powers of my 
mind in choosing the paths I should follow. In this I have had much more 

11 success, I think, than I would have had if I had never left my country or 
my books. 


Part Two 


At that time I was in Germany, where | had been called by the wars that 
are not yet ended there. While I was returning to the army from the 
coronation of the Emperor, the onset of winter detained me in quarters 
where, finding no conversation to divert me and fortunately having no 
cares or passions to trouble me, I stayed all day shut up alone in a 
stove-heated room, where I was completely free to converse with myself 
about my own thoughts.'! Among the first that occurred to me was the 
thought that there is not usually so much perfection in works composed of 
several parts and produced by various different craftsmen as in the works 
of one man. Thus we see that buildings undertaken and completed by a 
single architect are usually more attractive and better planned than those 
which several have tried to patch up by adapting old walls built for 
different purposes. Again, ancient cities which have gradually grown 
from mere villages into large towns are usually ill-proportioned, com- 
pared with those orderly towns which planners lay out as they fancy on 
level ground. Looking at the buildings of the former individually, you 
will often find as much art in them, if not more, than in those of the 
latter; but in view of their arrangement — a tall one here, a small one there 
12 — and the way they make the streets crooked and irregular, you would 
say it is chance, rather than the will of men using reason, that placed 
them so. And when you consider that there have always been certain 
officials whose job is to see that private buildings embellish public places, 
you will understand how difficult it is to make something perfect by 
working only on what others have produced. Again, I thought, peoples 
who have grown gradually from a half-savage to a civilized state, and 
have made their laws only in so far as they were forced to by the 


1 In 1619 Descartes attended the coronation of Ferdinand II in Frankfurt, which took 
place from 20 July to 9 September. The mentioned army was that of the Catholic Duke 
Maximilian of Bavaria. It is thought that Descartes was detained in a village near Ulm. 
His day of solitary reflection in a stove-heated room was, according to Baillet, 
10 November 1619. See above, p. 4. 


Part Two 117 


inconvenience of crimes and quarrels, could not be so well governed as 
those who from the beginning of their society have observed the basic 
laws laid down by some wise law-giver. Similarly, it is quite certain that 
the constitution of the true religion, whose articles have been made by 
God alone, must be incomparably better ordered than all the others. And 
to speak of human affairs, I believe that if Sparta was at one time very 
flourishing, this was not because each of its laws in particular was good 
(seeing that some were very strange and even contrary to good morals), 
but because they were devised by a single man and hence all tended to the 
same end.! And so I thought that since the sciences contained in books — 
at least those based upon merely probable, not demonstrative, reasoning 
— is compounded and amassed little by little from the opinions of many 
different persons, it never comes so close to the truth as the simple 
reasoning which a man of good sense naturally makes concerning 
whatever he comes across. So, too, I reflected that we were all children 
before being men and had to be governed for some time by our appetites 
and our teachers, which were often opposed to each other and neither of 
which, perhaps, always gave us the best advice; hence I thought it 
virtually impossible that our judgements should be as unclouded and firm 
as they would have been if we had had the full use of our reason from the 
moment of our birth, and if we had always been guided by it alone. 
Admittedly, we never see people pulling down all the houses of a city 
for the sole purpose of rebuilding them in a different style to make the 
streets more attractive; but we do see many individuals having their 
houses pulled down in order to rebuild them, some even being forced to 
do so when the houses are in danger of falling down and their 
foundations are insecure. This example convinced me that it would be 
unreasonable for an individual to plan to reform a state by changing it 
from the foundations up and overturning it in order to set it up again; or 
again for him to plan to reform the body of the sciences or the established 
order of teaching them in the schools. But regarding the opinions to 
which I had hitherto given credence, I thought that I could not do better 
than undertake to get rid of them, all at one go, in order to replace them 
afterwards with better ones, or with the same ones once I had squared 
them with the standards of reason. I firmly believed that in this way I 
would succeed in conducting my life much better than if I built only upon 
old foundations and relied only upon principles that I had accepted in my 
youth without ever examining whether they were true. For although | 
noted various difficulties in this undertaking, they were not insurmount- 
able. Nor could they be compared with those encountered in the reform 


1 By tradition the constitution of Sparta was attributed to Lycurgus. 


13 


14 


15 


16 


118 Discourse on the Method 


of even minor matters affecting public institutions. These large bodies are 
too difficult to raise up once overthrown, or even to hold up once they 
begin to totter, and their fall cannot but be a hard one. Moreover, any 
imperfections they may possess — and their very diversity suffices to 
ensure that many do possess them — have doubtless been much smoothed 
over by custom; and custom has even prevented or imperceptibly 
corrected many imperfections that prudence could not so well provide 
against. Finally, it is almost always easier to put up with their imperfec- 
tions than to change them, just as it is much better to follow the main 
roads that wind through mountains, which have gradually become 
smooth and convenient through frequent use, than to try to take a more 
direct route by clambering over rocks and descending to the foot of 
precipices. 

That is why I cannot by any means approve of those meddlesome and 
restless characters who, called neither by birth nor by fortune to the 
management of public affairs, are yet forever thinking up some new 
reform. And if I thought this book contained the slightest ground for 
suspecting me of such folly, I would be very reluctant to permit its 
publication. My plan has never gone beyond trying to reform my own 
thoughts and construct them upon a foundation which is all my own. If | 
am sufficiently pleased with my work to present you with this sample of 
it, this does not mean that I would advise anyone to imitate it. Those on 
whom God has bestowed more of his favours will perhaps have higher 
aims; but I fear that even my aim may be too bold for many people. The 
simple resolution to abandon all the opinions one has hitherto accepted is 
not an example that everyone ought to follow. The world is largely 
composed of two types of minds for whom it is quite unsuitable. First, 
there are those who, believing themselves cleverer than they are, cannot 
avoid precipitate judgements and never have the patience to direct all 
their thoughts in an orderly manner; consequently, if they once took the 
liberty of doubting the principles they accepted and of straying from the 
common path, they could never stick to the track that must be taken as a 
short-cut, and they would remain lost all their lives. Secondly, there are 
those who have enough reason or modesty to recognize that they are less 
capable of distinguishing the true from the false than certain others by 
whom they can be taught; such people should be content to follow the 
opinions of these others rather than seek better opinions themselves. 

For myself, I would undoubtedly have been counted among the latter if 
I had had only one teacher or if I had never known the differences that 
have always existed among the opinions of the most learned. But in my 
college days I discovered that nothing can be imagined which is too 
strange or incredible to have been said by some philosopher; and since 


Part Two 119 


then I have recognized through my travels that those with views quite 
contrary to ours are not on that account barbarians or savages, but that 
many of them make use of reason as much or more than we do. | 
thought, too, how the same man, with the same mind, if brought up from 
infancy among the French or Germans, develops otherwise than he 
would if he had always lived among the Chinese or cannibals; and how, 
even in our fashions of dress, the very thing that pleased us ten years ago, 
and will perhaps please us again ten years hence, now strikes us as 
extravagant and ridiculous. Thus it is custom and example that persuade 
us, rather than any certain knowledge. And yet a majority vote is 
worthless as a proof of truths that are at all difficult to discover; for a 
single man is much more likely to hit upon them than a group of people. I 
was, then, unable to choose anyone whose opinions struck me as 
preferable to those of all others, and I found myself as it were forced to 
become my own guide. 

But, like a man who walks alone in the dark, I resolved to proceed so 
slowly, and to use such circumspection in all things, that even if I made 
but little progress I should at least be sure not to fall. Nor would I begin 
rejecting completely any of the opinions which may have slipped into my 
mind without having been introduced there by reason, until I had first 
spent enough time in planning the work I was undertaking and in seeking 
the true method of attaining the knowledge of everything within my 
mental capabilities. 

When I was younger, my philosophical studies had included some 
logic, and my mathematical studies some geometrical analysis and 
algebra. These three arts or sciences, it seemed, ought to contribute 
something to my plan. But on further examination I observed with regard 
to logic that syllogisms and most of its other techniques are of less use for 
learning things than for explaining to others the things one already 
knows or even, as in the art of Lully, for speaking without judgement 
about matters of which one is ignorant.' And although logic does contain 
many excellent and true precepts, these are mixed up with so many 
others which are harmful or superfluous that it is almost as difficult to 
distinguish them as it is to carve a Diana or a Minerva from an unhewn 
block of marble. As to the analysis of the ancients and the algebra of the 
moderns, they cover only highly abstract matters, which seem to have no 
use. Moreover the former is so closely tied to the examination of figures 
that it cannot exercise the intellect without greatly tiring the imagination; 
and the latter is so confined to certain rules and symbols that the end 
result is a confused and obscure art which encumbers the mind, rather 


1 Raymond Lully (1232-1315) was a Catalan theologian whose Ars Magna purported to 
provide a universal method of discovery. 


17 


18 


19 


20 


120 Discourse on the Method 


than a science which cultivates it. For this reason I thought I had to seek 
some other method comprising the advantages of these three subjects but 
free from their defects. Now a multiplicity of laws often provides an 
excuse for vices, so that a state is much better governed when it has but 
few laws which are strictly observed; in the same way, I thought, in place 
of the large number of rules that make up logic, I would find the 
following four to be sufficient, provided that I made a strong and 
unswerving resolution never to fail to observe them. 

The first was never to accept anything as true if I did not have evident 
knowledge of its truth: that is, carefully to avoid precipitate conclusions 
and preconceptions, and to include nothing more in my judgements than 
what presented itself to my mind so clearly and so distinctly that I had no 
occasion to doubt it. 

The second, to divide each of the difficulties | examined into as many 
parts as possible and as may be required in order to resolve them better. 

The third, to direct my thoughts in an orderly manner, by beginning 
with the simplest and most easily known objects in order to ascend little 
by little, step by step, to knowledge of the most complex, and by supposing 
some order even among objects that have no natural order of precedence. 

And the last, throughout to make enumerations so complete, and 
reviews so comprehensive, that I could be sure of leaving nothing out. 

Those long chains composed of very simple and easy reasonings, which 
geometers customarily use to arrive at their most difficult demonstra- 
tions, had given me occasion to suppose that all the things which can fall 
under human knowledge are interconnected in the same way. And | 
thought that, provided we refrain from accepting anything as true which 
is not, and always keep to the order required for deducing one thing from 
another, there can be nothing too remote to be reached in the end or too 
well hidden to be discovered. I had no great difficulty in deciding which 
things to begin with, for I knew already that it must be with the simplest 
and most easily known. Reflecting, too, that of all those who have hitherto 
sought after truth in the sciences, mathematicians alone have been able to 
find any demonstrations — that is to say, certain and evident reasonings—I 
had no doubt that I should begin with the very things that they studied. 
From this, however, the only advantage hoped to gain was to accustom 
my mind to nourish itself on truths and not to be satisfied with bad 
reasoning. Nor did I have any intention of trying to learn all the special 
sciences commonly called ‘mathematics’.! For I saw that, despite the 
diversity of their objects, they agree in considering nothing but the 
various relations or proportions that hold between these objects. And so I 


1 These are subjects with a theoretical basis in mathematics, such as astronomy, music and 
optics. 


Part Two I21 


thought it best to examine only such proportions in general, supposing 
them to hold only between such items as would help me to know them 
more easily. At the same time I would not restrict them to these items, so 
that I could apply them the better afterwards to whatever others they 
might fit. Next I observed that in order to know these proportions | 
would need sometimes to consider them separately, and sometimes 
merely to keep them in mind or understand many together. And | 
thought that in order the better to consider them separately I should 
suppose them to hold between lines, because | did not find anything 
simpler, nor anything that I could represent more distinctly to my 
imagination and senses. But in order to keep them in mind or understand 
several together, I thought it necessary to designate them by the briefest 
possible symbols. In this way I would take over all that is best in 
geometrical analysis and in algebra, using the one to correct all the 
defects of the other. 

In fact, I venture to say that by strictly observing the few rules I had 
chosen, I became very adept at unravelling all the questions which fall 
under these two sciences. So much so, in fact, that in the two or three 
months I spent in examining them — beginning with the simplest and 
most general and using each truth I found as a rule for finding further 
truths — not only did I solve many problems which I had previously 
thought very difficult, but also it seemed to me towards the end that even 
in those cases where I was still in the dark I could determine by what 
means and to what extent it was possible to find a solution. This claim 
will not appear too arrogant if you consider that since there is only one 
truth concerning any matter, whoever discovers this truth knows as 
much about it as can be known. For example, if a child who has been 
taught arithmetic does a sum following the rules, he can be sure of having 
found everything the human mind can discover regarding the sum he was 
considering. In short, the method which instructs us to follow the correct 
order, and to enumerate exactly all the relevant factors, contains 
everything that gives certainty to the rules of arithmetic. 

But what pleased me most about this method was that by following it I 
was Sure in every case to use my reason, if not perfectly, at least as well as 
was in my power. Moreover, as I practised the method I felt my mind 
gradually become accustomed to conceiving its objects more clearly and 
distinctly; and since I did not restrict the method to any particular 
subject-matter, I hoped to apply it as usefully to the problems of the other 
sciences as I had to those of algebra. Not that I would have dared to try at 
the outset to examine every problem that might arise, for that would 
itself have been contrary to the order which the method prescribes. But 
observing that the principles of these sciences must all be derived from 


21 


22 


2.3 


122 Discourse on the Method 


philosophy, in which I had not yet discovered any certain ones, I thought 
that first of all I had to try to establish some certain principles in 
philosophy. And since this is the most important task of all, and the one 
in which precipitate conclusions and preconceptions are most to be 
feared, I thought that I ought not try accomplish it until I had reached a 
more mature age than twenty-three, as I then was, and until I had first 
spent a long time in preparing myself for it. I had to uproot from my 
mind all the wrong opinions I had previously accepted, amass a variety of 
experiences to serve as the subject-matter of my reasonings, and practise 
constantly my self-prescribed method in order to strengthen myself more 
and more in its use. 


Part Three 


Now, before starting to rebuild your house, it is not enough simply to 
pull it down, to make provision for materials and architects (or else train 
yourself in architecture), and to have carefully drawn up the plans; you 
must also provide yourself with some other place where you can live 
comfortably while building is in progress. Likewise, lest I should remain 
indecisive in my actions while reason obliged me to be so in my 
judgements, and in order to live as happily as I could during this time, I 
formed for myself a provisional moral code consisting of just three or 
four maxims, which I should like to tell you about. 

The first was to obey the laws and customs of my country, holding 
constantly to the religion in which by God’s grace I had been instructed 
from my childhood, and governing myself in all other matters according 
to the most moderate and least extreme opinions — the opinions 
commonly accepted in practice by the most sensible of those with whom I 
should have to live. For I had begun at this time to count my own 
opinions as worthless, because I wished to submit them all to examina- 
tion, and so I was sure I could do no better than follow those of the most 
sensible men. And although there may be men as sensible among the 
Persians or Chinese as among ourselves, I thought it would be most 
useful for me to be guided by those with whom I should have to live. I 
thought too that in order to discover what opinions they really held I had 
to attend to what they did rather than what they said. For with our 
declining standards of behaviour, few people are willing to say every- 
thing that they believe; and besides, many people do not know what they 
believe, since believing something and knowing that one believes it are 
different acts of thinking, and the one often occurs without the other. 
Where many opinions were equally well accepted, I chose only the most 
moderate, both because these are always the easiest to act upon and 


Part Three 123 


probably the best (excess being usually bad), and also so that if I made a 
mistake, I should depart less from the right path than I would if I chose 
One extreme when I ought to have pursued the other. In particular, | 
counted as excessive all promises by which we give up some of our 
freedom. It was not that I disapproved of laws which remedy the 
inconstancy of weak minds by allowing us to make vows or contracts 
that oblige perseverance in some worthy project (or even, for the security 
of commerce, in some indifferent one). But I saw nothing in the world 
which remained always in the same state, and for my part I was 
determined to make my judgements more and more perfect, rather than 
worse. For these reasons I thought I would be sinning against good sense 
if | were to take my previous approval of something as obliging me to 
regard it as good later on, when it had perhaps ceased to be good or I no 
longer regarded it as such. 

My second maxim was to be as firm and decisive in my actions as | 
could, and to follow even the most doubtful opinions, once I had adopted 
them, with no less constancy than if they had been quite certain. In this 
respect I would be imitating a traveller who, upon finding himself lost in 
a forest, should not wander about turning this way and that, and still less 
stay in one place, but should keep walking as straight as he can in one 
direction, never changing it for slight reasons even if mere chance made 
him choose it in the first place; for in this way, even if he does not go 
exactly where he wishes, he will at least end up in a place where he is 
likely to be better off than in the middle of a forest. Similarly, since in 
everyday life we must often act without delay, it is a most certain truth 
that when it is not in our power to discern the truest opinions, we must 
follow the most probable. Even when no opinions appear more probable 
than any others, we must still adopt some; and having done so we must 
then regard them not as doubtful, from a practical point of view, but as 
most true and certain, on the grounds that the reason which made us 
adopt them is itself true and certain. By following this maxim I could free 
myself from all the regrets and remorse which usually trouble the 
consciences of those weak and faltering spirits who allow themselves to 
set out on some supposedly good course of action which later, in their 
inconstancy, they judge to be bad. 

My third maxim was to try always to master myself rather than 
fortune, and change my desires rather than the order of the world. In 
general I would become accustomed to believing that nothing lies entirely 
within our power except our thoughts, so that after doing our best in 
dealing with matters external to us, whatever we fail to achieve is 
absolutely impossible so far as we are concerned. This alone, I thought, 
would be sufficient to prevent me from desiring in future something | 


24 


25 


26 


27 


28 


124 Discourse on the Method 


could not get, and so to make me content. For our will naturally tends to 
desire only what our intellect represents to it as somehow possible; and 
so it is certain that if we consider all external goods as equally beyond 
our power, we shall not regret the absence of goods which seem to be our 
birthright when we are deprived of them through no fault of our own, 
any more than we regret not possessing the kingdom of China or of 
Mexico. Making a virtue of necessity, as they say, we shall not desire to 
be healthy when ill or free when imprisoned, any more than we now 
desire to have bodies of a material as indestructible as diamond or wings 
to fly like the birds. But I admit that it takes long practice and repeated 
meditation to become accustomed to seeing everything in this light. In 
this, I believe, lay the secret of those philosophers who in earlier times 
were able to escape from the dominion of fortune and, despite suffering 
and poverty, rival their gods in happiness. Through constant reflection 
upon the limits prescribed for them by nature, they became perfectly 
convinced that nothing was in their power but their thoughts, and this 
alone was sufficient to prevent them from being attracted to other things. 
Their mastery over their thoughts was so absolute that they had reason to 
count themselves richer, more powerful, freer and happier than other 
men who, because they lack this philosophy, never achieve such mastery 
over all their desires, however favoured by nature and fortune they may 
be. 

Finally, to conclude this moral code, I decided to review the various 
occupations which men have in this life, in order to try to choose the best. 
Without wishing to say anything about the occupations of others, | 
thought I could do no better than to continue with the very one I was 
engaged in, and devote my whole life to cultivating my reason and 
advancing as far as I could in the knowledge of the truth, following the 
method I had prescribed for myself. Since beginning to use this method | 
had felt such extreme contentment that I did not think one could enjoy 
any sweeter or purer one in this life. Every day I discovered by its means 
truths which, it seemed to me, were quite important and were generally 
unknown by other men; and the satisfaction they gave me so filled my 
mind that nothing else mattered to me. Besides, the sole basis of the 
foregoing three maxims was the plan I had to continue my self- 
instruction. For since God has given each of us a light to distinguish truth 
from falsehood, I should not have thought myself obliged to rest content 
with the opinions of others for a single moment if I had not intended in 
due course to examine them using my own judgement; and I could not 
have avoided having scruples about following these opinions, if I had not 
hoped to lose no opportunity to discover better ones, in case there were 
any. Lastly, I could not have limited my desires, or been happy, had I not 


Part Three 125 


been following a path by which I thought I was sure to acquire all the 
knowledge of which I was capable, and in this way all the true goods 
within my reach. For since our will tends to pursue or avoid only what 
our intellect represents as good or bad, we need only to judge well in 
order to act well, and to judge as well as we can in order to do our best — 
that is to say, in order to acquire all the virtues and in general all the 
other goods we can acquire. And when we are certain of this, we cannot 
fail to be happy. 

Once I had established these maxims and set them on one side together 
with the truths of faith, which have always been foremost among my 
beliefs, 1 judged that I could freely undertake to rid myself of all the rest 
of my opinions. As I expected to be able to achieve this more readily by 
talking with other men than by staying shut up in the stove-heated room 
where I had had all these thoughts, I set out on my travels again before 
the end of winter. Throughout the following nine years I did nothing but 
roam about in the world, trying to be a spectator rather than an actor in 
all the comedies that are played out there. Reflecting especially upon the 
points in every subject which might make it suspect and give occasion for 
us to make mistakes, I kept uprooting from my mind any errors that 
might previously have slipped into it. In doing this I was not copying the 
sceptics, who doubt only for the sake of doubting and pretend to be 
always undecided; on the contrary, my whole aim was to reach certainty 
— to cast aside the loose earth and sand so as to come upon rock or clay. 
In this I think I was quite successful. For I tried to expose the falsity or 
uncertainty of the propositions I was examining by clear and certain 
arguments, not by weak conjectures; and I never encountered any 
proposition so doubtful that I could not draw from it some quite certain 
conclusion, if only the conclusion that it contained nothing certain. And, 
just as in pulling down an old house we usually keep the remnants for use 
in building a new one, so in destroying all those opinions of mine that I 
judged ill-founded I made various observations and acquired many 
experiences which I have since used in establishing more certain opin- 
ions. Moreover, I continued practising the method I had prescribed for 
myself. Besides taking care in general to conduct all my thoughts 
according to its rules, I set aside some hours now and again to apply it 
more particularly to mathematical problems. I also applied it to certain 
other problems which I could put into something like mathematical form 
by detaching them from all the principles of the other sciences, which | 
did not find sufficiently secure (as you will see I have done in many 
problems discussed later in this book). Thus, while appearing to live like 
those concerned only to lead an agreeable and blameless life, who take 
care to keep their pleasures free from vices, and who engage in every 


29 


30 


31 


126 Discourse on the Method 


honest pastime in order to enjoy their leisure without boredom, I never 
stopped pursuing my project, and I made perhaps more progress in the 
knowledge of the truth than I would have if I had done nothing but read 
books or mix with men of letters. 

Those nine years passed by, however, without my taking any side 
regarding the questions which are commonly debated among the learned, 
or beginning to search for the foundations of any philosophy more 
certain than the commonly accepted one. The example of many fine 
intellects who had previously had this project, but had not, I thought, 
met with success, made me imagine the difficulties to be so great that I 
would not have dared to embark upon it so soon if I had not noticed that 
some people were spreading the rumour that I had already completed it. I 
cannot say what basis they had for this opinion. If I contributed anything 
to it by my conversation, it must have been because | confessed my 
ignorance more ingenuously than is customary for those with a little 
learning, and perhaps also because I displayed the reasons I had for 
doubting many things which others regard as certain, rather than because 
I boasted of some learning. But as I was honest enough not to wish to be 
taken for what I was not, I thought I had to try by every means to become 
worthy of the reputation that was given me. Exactly eight years ago this 
desire made me resolve to move away from any place where | might have 
acquaintances and retire to this country, where the long duration of the 
war has led to the establishment of such order that the armies maintained 
here seem to serve only to make the enjoyment of the fruits of peace all 
the more secure.' Living here, amidst this great mass of busy people 
who are more concerned with their own affairs than curious about those 
of others, I have been able to lead a life as solitary and withdrawn as if | 
were in the most remote desert, while lacking none of the comforts found 
in the most populous cities. 


Part Four 


I do not know whether I should tell you of the first meditations that I had 
there, for they are perhaps too metaphysical and uncommon for every- 
one’s taste. And yet, to make it possible to judge whether the foundations 
I have chosen are firm enough, I am in a way obliged to speak of them. 
For a long time I had observed, as noted above, that in practical life it is 
sometimes necessary to act upon opinions which one knows to be quite 
uncertain just as if they were indubitable. But since I now wished to 
devote myself solely to the search for truth, I thought it necessary to do 


1 Descartes settled in Holland in 1629. The war was that conducted by the United 
Provinces against Spain from 1572 to 1648. 


Part Four 127 


the very opposite and reject as if absolutely false everything in which | 
could imagine the least doubt, in order to see if I was left believing 
anything that was entirely indubitable. Thus, because our senses some- 
times deceive us, I decided to suppose that nothing was such as they led 
us to imagine. And since there are men who make mistakes in reasoning, 
committing logical fallacies concerning the simplest questions in geomet- 
ry, and because | judged that I was as prone to error as anyone else, | 
rejected as unsound all the arguments I had previously taken as demon- 
strative proofs. Lastly, considering that the very thoughts we have while 
awake may also occur while we sleep without any of them being at the 
that time true, I resolved to pretend that all the things that had ever 
entered my mind were no more true than the illusions of my dreams. But 
immediately I noticed that while I was trying thus to think everything 
false, it was necessary that I, who was thinking this, was something. And 
observing that this truth ‘I am thinking, therefore I exist’ was so firm and 
sure that all the most extravagant suppositions of the sceptics were 
incapable of shaking it, I decided that I could accept it without scruple as 
the first principle of the philosophy I was seeking. 

Next I examined attentively what I was. I saw that while I could 
pretend that I had no body and that there was no world and no place for 
me to be in, I could not for all that pretend that I did not exist. I saw on 
the contrary that from the mere fact that I thought of doubting the truth 
of other things, it followed quite evidently and certainly that I existed; 
whereas if I had merely ceased thinking, even if everything else I had ever 
imagined had been true, I should have had no reason to believe that I 
existed. From this I knew I was a substance whose whole essence or 
nature is simply to think, and which does not require any place, or 
depend on any material thing, in order to exist. Accordingly this ‘I — that 
is, the soul by which I am what I am — is entirely distinct from the body, 
and indeed is easier to know than the body, and would not fail to be 
whatever it is, even if the body did not exist. 

After this I considered in general what is required of a proposition in 
order for it to be true and certain; for since I had just found one that I 
knew to be such, I thought that I ought also to know what this certainty 
consists in. I observed that there is nothing at all in the proposition ‘I am 
thinking, therefore I exist’ to assure me that I am speaking the truth, 
except that I see very clearly that in order to think it is necessary to exist. 
So I decided that I could take it as a general rule that the things we 
conceive very clearly and very distinctly are all true; only there is some 
difficulty in recognizing which are the things that we distinctly conceive. 

Next, reflecting upon the fact that I was doubting and that conse- 
quently my being was not wholly perfect (for I saw clearly that it is a 


32 


33 


34 


35 


128 Discourse on the Method 


greater perfection to know than to doubt), I decided to inquire into the 
source of my ability to think of something more perfect than I was; and I 
recognized very clearly that this had to come from some nature that was 
in fact more perfect. Regarding the thoughts I had of many other things 
outside me, like the heavens, the earth, light, heat and numerous others, 
I had no such difficulty in knowing where they came from. For I observed 
nothing in them that seemed to make them superior to me; and so I could 
believe that, if they were true, they depended on my nature in so far as it 
had any perfection, and if they were not true, I got them from nothing — 
in other words, they were in me because I had some defect. But the same 
could not hold for the idea of a being more perfect than my own. For it 
was manifestly impossible to get this from nothing; and I could not have 
got it from myself since it is no less contradictory that the more perfect 
should result from the less perfect, and depend on it, than that something 
should proceed from nothing. So there remained only the possibility that 
the idea had been put into me by a nature truly more perfect than I was 
and even possessing in itself all the perfections of which I could have any 
idea, that is — to explain myself in one word — by God. To this I added 
that since I knew of some perfections that I did not possess, I was not the 
only being which existed (here, by your leave, I shall freely use some 
scholastic terminology), but there had of necessity to be some other, more 
perfect being on which I depended and from which I had acquired all that 
I possessed. For if I had existed alone and independently of every other 
being, so that I had got from myself what little of the perfect being I 
participated in, then for the same reason | could have got from myself 
everything else I knew I lacked, and thus been myself infinite, eternal, 
immutable, omniscient, omnipotent; in short, I could have had all the 
perfections which I could observe to be in God. For, according to the 
arguments I have just advanced, in order to know the nature of God, as 
far as my own nature was capable of knowing it, I had only to consider, 
for each thing of which I found in myself some idea, whether or not it 
was a perfection to possess it; and I was sure that none of those which 
indicated any imperfection was in God, but that all the others were. Thus 
I saw that doubt, inconstancy, sadness and the like could not be in God, 
since I myself would have been very glad to be free from them. Besides 
this, | had ideas of many corporeal things capable of being perceived by 
the senses; for even if I were to suppose that I was dreaming and that 
whatever I saw or imagined was false, yet I could not deny that the ideas 
were truly in my mind. But since I had already recognized very clearly 
from my own case that the intellectual nature is distinct from the 
corporeal, and as I observed that all composition is evidence of depend- 
ence and that dependence is manifestly a defect, I concluded that it could 


Part Four 129 


not be a perfection in God to be composed of these two natures, and 
consequently that he was not composed of them. But if there were any 
bodies in the world, or any intelligences or other natures that were not 
wholly perfect, their being must depend on God’s power in such a 
manner that they could not subsist for a single moment without him. 

After that, wishing to seek other truths, I considered the object studied 
by geometers. I conceived of this as a continuous body, or a space 
indefinitely extended in length, breadth and height or depth, and divisible 
into different parts which may have various shapes and sizes, and may be 
moved or transposed in every way: for all this is assumed by geometers in 
their object of study. I went through some of their simpler demonstra- 
tions and noted that the great certainty which everyone ascribes to them 
is founded solely on their being conceived as evident (in accordance with 
the rule stated above). I noted also that there was nothing at all in these 
demonstrations which assured me of the existence of their object. For 
example, I saw clearly that the three angles of any given triangle must 
equal two right angles; yet for all that, I saw nothing which assured me 
that there existed any triangle in the world. Whereas when I looked again 
at the idea I had of a perfect being, I found that this included existence in 
the same way as — or even more evidently than — the idea of a triangle 
includes the equality of its three angles to two right angles, or the idea of 
a sphere includes the equidistance of all the points on the surface from 
the centre. Thus I concluded that it is at least as certain as any 
geometrical proof that God, who is this perfect being, is or exists. 

But many are convinced that there is some difficulty in knowing God, 
and even in knowing what their soul is. The reason for this is that they 
never raise their minds above things which can be perceived by the 
senses: they are so used to thinking of things only by imagining them 
(a way of thinking specially suited to material things) that whatever is 
unimaginable seems to them unintelligible. This is sufficiently obvious 
from the fact that even the scholastic philosophers take it as a maxim that 
there is nothing in the intellect which has not previously been in the 
senses; and yet it is certain that the ideas of God and of the soul have 
never been in the senses. It seems to me that trying to use one’s 
imagination in order to understand these ideas is like trying to use one’s 
eyes in order to hear sounds or smell odours — though there is this 
difference, that the sense of sight gives us no less assurance of the reality 
of its objects than do the senses of smell and hearing, while neither our 
imagination nor our senses could ever assure us of anything without the 
intervention of our intellect. 

Finally, if there are still people who are not sufficiently convinced of 
the existence of God and of their soul by the arguments I have proposed, 


36 


37 


38 


39 


130 Discourse on the Method 


I would have them know that everything else of which they may think 
themselves more sure — such as their having a body, there being stars and 
an earth, and the like — is less certain. For although we have a moral 
certainty! about these things, so that it seems we cannot doubt them 
without being extravagant, nevertheless when it is a question of meta- 
physical certainty, we cannot reasonably deny that there are adequate 
grounds for not being entirely sure about them. We need only observe 
that in sleep we may imagine in the same way that we have a different 
body and see different stars and a different earth, without there being any 
of these things. For how do we know that the thoughts which come to us 
in dreams are any more false than the others, seeing that they are often no 
less lively and distinct? However much the best minds study this 
question, I do not believe they will be able to give any reason sufficient to 
remove this doubt unless they presuppose the existence of God. For in the 
first place, what I took just now as a rule, namely that everything we 
conceive very clearly and very distinctly is true, is assured only for the 
reasons that God is or exists, that he is a perfect being, and that 
everything in us comes from him. It follows that our ideas or notions, 
being real things and coming from God, cannot be anything but true, in 
every respect in which they are clear and distinct. Thus, if we frequently 
have ideas containing some falsity, this can happen only because there is 
something confused and obscure in them, for in that respect they 
participate in nothingness, that is, they are in us in this confused state 
only because we are not wholly perfect. And it is evident that it is no less 
contradictory that falsity or imperfection as such should proceed from 
God than that truth or perfection should proceed from nothingness. But 
if we did not know that everything real and true within us comes from a 
perfect and infinite being then, however clear and distinct our ideas were, 
we would have no reason to be sure that they had the perfection of being 
true. 

But once the knowledge of God and the soul has made us certain of 
this rule, it is easy to recognize that the things we imagine in dreams 
should in no way make us doubt the truth of the thoughts we have when 
awake. For if one happened even in sleep to have some very distinct idea 
(if, say, a geometer devised some new proof), one’s being asleep would 
not prevent the idea from being true. And as to the most common error 
of our dreams, which consists in their representing various objects to us 
in the same way as our external senses do, it does not matter that this 
gives us occasion to doubt the truth of such ideas, for often they can also 
mislead us without our being asleep — as when those with jaundice see 


1 See footnote 2, p. 289 below. 


Part Five 131 


everything coloured yellow, or when stars or other very distant bodies 
appear to us much smaller than they are. For after all, whether we are 
awake or asleep, we ought never to let ourselves be convinced except by 
the evidence of our reason. It will be observed that I say ‘our reason’, not 
‘our imagination’ or ‘our senses’. Even though we see the sun very 
clearly, we must not judge on that account that it is only as large as we 
see it; and we can distinctly imagine a lion’s head on a goat’s body 
without having to conclude from this that a chimera exists in the world. 
For reason does not insist that what we thus see or imagine is true. But it 
does insist that all our ideas or notions must have some foundation of 
truth; for otherwise it would not be possible that God, who is all-perfect 
and all-truthful, should have placed them in us. And our reasonings are 
never so evident or complete in sleep as in waking life, although 
sometimes our imaginings in sleep are as lively and distinct as in waking 
life, or more so. Hence reason also demands that, since our thoughts 
cannot all be true because we are not wholly perfect, what truth they do 
possess must inevitably be found in the thoughts we have when awake, 
rather than in our dreams. 


Part Five 


I would gladly go on and reveal the whole chain of other truths that I 
deduced from these first ones. But in order to do this I would have to 
discuss many questions that are being debated among the learned, and | 
do not wish to quarrel with them. So it will be better, I think, for me not 
to do this, and merely to say in general what these questions are, so as to 
let those who are wiser decide whether it would be useful for the public 
to be informed more specifically about them. I have always remained firm 
in the resolution I had taken to assume no principle other than the one | 
have just used to demonstrate the existence of God and of the soul, and 
to accept nothing as true which did not seem to me clearer and more 
certain than the demonstrations of the geometers had hitherto seemed. 
And yet I venture to say that I have found a way to satisfy myself within a 
short time about all the principal difficulties usually discussed in philoso- 
phy. What is more, I have noticed certain laws which God has so 
established in nature, and of which he has implanted such notions in our 
minds, that after adequate reflection we cannot doubt that they are 
exactly observed in everything which exists or occurs in the world. 
Moreover, by considering what follows from these laws it seems to me 
that I have discovered many truths more useful and important than 
anything I had previously learned or even hoped to learn. 

I endeavoured to explain the most important of these truths in a 


40 


41 


42 


43 


132 Discourse on the Method 


treatise which certain considerations prevent me from publishing, and I 
know of no better way to make them known than by summarizing its 
contents.! My aim was to include in it everything I thought I knew about 
the nature of material things before I began to write it. Now a painter 
cannot represent all the different sides of a solid body equally well on his 
flat canvas, and so he chooses one of the principal ones, sets it facing the 
light, and shades the others so as to make them stand out only when 
viewed from the perspective of the chosen side. In just the same way, 
fearing that I could not put everything I had in mind into my discourse, I 
undertook merely to expound quite fully what I understood about light. 
Then, as the occasion arose, | added something about the sun and fixed 
stars, because almost all light comes from them; about the heavens, 
because they transmit light; about planets, comets and the earth, because 
they reflect light; about terrestrial bodies in particular, because they are 
either coloured or transparent or luminous; and finally about man, 
because he observes these bodies. But I did not want to bring these 
matters too much into the open, for I wished to be free to say what | 
thought about them without having either to follow or to refute the 
accepted opinions of the learned. So | decided to leave our world wholly 
for them to argue about, and to speak solely of what would happen in a 
new world. | therefore supposed that God now created, somewhere in 
imaginary spaces, enough matter to compose such a world; that he 
variously and randomly agitated the different parts of this matter so as to 
form a chaos as confused as any the poets could invent; and that he then 
did nothing but lend his regular concurrence to nature, leaving it to act 
according to the laws he established. First of all, then, I described this 
matter, trying to represent it so that there is absolutely nothing, | think, 
which is clearer and more intelligible, with the exception of what has just 
been said about God and the soul. In fact I expressly supposed that this 
matter lacked all those forms or qualities about which they dispute in the 
Schools, and in general that it had only those features the knowledge of 
which was so natural to our souls that we could not even pretend not to 
know them. Further, I showed what the laws of nature were, and without 
basing my arguments on any principle other than the infinite perfections 
of God, I tried to demonstrate all those laws about which we could have 
any doubt, and to show that they are such that, even if God created many 
worlds, there could not be any in which they failed to be observed. After 
this, | showed how, in consequence of these laws, the greater part of the 
matter of this chaos had to become disposed and arranged in a certain 
way, which made it resemble our heavens; and how, at the same time, 


1 The treatise of which The World and the Treatise on Man are parts. See pp. 79-108 
above. 


Part Five 133 


some of its parts had to form an earth, some planets and comets, and 
others a sun and fixed stars. Here I dwelt upon the subject of light, 
explaining at some length the nature of the light that had to be present in 
the sun and the stars, how from there it travelled instantaneously across 
the immense distances of the heavens, and how it was reflected from the 
planets and comets to the earth. To this I added many points about the 
substance, position, motions and all the various qualities of these heavens 
and stars; and I thought I had thereby said enough to show that for 
anything observed in the heavens and stars of our world, something 
wholly similar had to appear, or at least could appear, in those of the 
world I was describing. From that I went on to speak of the earth in 
particular: how, although I had expressly supposed that God had put no 
gravity into the matter of which it was formed, still all its parts tended 
exactly towards its centre; how, there being water and air on its surface, 
the disposition of the heavens and heavenly bodies (chiefly the moon), 
had to cause an ebb and flow similar in all respects to that observed in 
our seas, as well as a current of both water and air from east to west like 
the one we observe between the tropics; how mountains, seas, springs 
and rivers could be formed naturally there, and how metals could appear 
in mines, plants grow in fields, and generally how all the bodies we call 
‘mixed’ or ‘composite’ could come into being there. Among other things, 
I took pains to make everything belonging to the nature of fire very 
clearly understandable, because I know nothing else in the world, apart 
from the heavenly bodies, that produces light. Thus I made clear how it is 
formed and fuelled, how sometimes it possesses only heat without light, 
and sometimes light without heat; how it can produce different colours 
and various other qualities in different bodies; how it melts some bodies 
and hardens others; how it can consume almost all bodies, or turn them 
into ashes and smoke; and finally how it can, by the mere force of its 
action, form glass from these ashes — something I took particular 
pleasure in describing since it seems to me as wonderful a transmutation 
as any that takes place in nature. 

Yet I did not wish to infer from all this that our world was created in 
the way I proposed, for it is much more likely that from the beginning 
God made it just as it had to be. But it is certain, and it is an opinion 
commonly accepted among theologians, that the act by which God now 
preserves it is just the same as that by which he created it. So, even if in 
the beginning God had given the world only the form of a chaos, 
provided that he established the laws of nature and then lent his 
concurrence to enable nature to operate as it normally does, we may 
believe without impugning the miracle of creation that by this means 
alone all purely material things could in the course of time have come to 


44 


45 


46 


47 


134 Discourse on the Method 


be just as we now see them. And their nature is much easier to conceive if 
we see them develop gradually in this way than if we consider them 
only in their completed form. 

From the description of inanimate bodies and plants I went on to 
describe animals, and in particular men. But | did not yet have sufficient 
knowledge to speak of them in the same manner as | did of the other 
things — that is, by demonstrating effects from causes and showing from 
what seeds and in what manner nature must produce them. So | 
contented myself with supposing that God formed the body of a man 
exactly like our own both in the outward shape of its limbs and in the 
internal arrangement of its organs, using for its composition nothing but 
the matter that I had described. I supposed, too, that in the beginning 
God did not place in this body any rational soul or any other thing to 
serve as a vegetative or sensitive soul, but rather that he kindled in its 
heart one of those fires without light which I had already explained, and 
whose nature I understood to be no different from that of the fire which 
heats hay when it has been stored before it is dry, or which causes new 
wine to seethe when it is left to ferment from the crushed grapes. And 
when I looked to see what functions would occur in such a body | found 
precisely those which may occur in us without our thinking of them, and 
hence without any contribution from our soul (that is, from that part of 
us, distinct from the body, whose nature, as I have said previously, is 
simply to think). These functions are just the ones in which animals 
without reason may be said to resemble us. But I could find none of the 
functions which, depending on thought, are the only ones that belong to 
us as men; though I found all these later on, once I had supposed that 
God created a rational soul and joined it to this body in a particular way 
which I described. 

But so that you might see how | dealt with this subject, I shall give my 
explanation of the movement of the heart and the arteries. Being the first 
and most widespread movement that we observe in animals, it will 
readily enable us to decide how we ought to think about all the others. 
But first, so there may be less difficulty in understanding what I shall say, 
I should like anyone unversed in anatomy to take the trouble, before 
reading this, to have the heart of some large animal with lungs dissected 
before him (for such a heart is in all respects sufficiently like that of a 
man), and to be shown the two chambers or cavities which are present in 
it. First, there is the cavity on the right, to which two very large tubes are 
connected: these are the vena cava, which is the principal receptacle of 
the blood and is like the trunk of a tree of which all the other veins of the 
body are the branches; and the arterial vein (ill-named because it is really 
an artery), which originates in the heart and after leaving it divides into 


Part Five 135 


many branches that spread throughout the lungs. Then there is the cavity 
on the left, likewise connected to two tubes which are as large as the 
others or even larger: the venous artery (also ill-named because it is 
nothing but a vein), which comes from the lungs where it is divided into 
many branches intertwined with those of the arterial vein and with those 
of the windpipe (as it is called) through which the air we breathe enters; 
and the great artery which goes out from the heart and sends its branches 
throughout the body. I should also like the reader to be shown the eleven 
little membranes which, like so many little doors, open and close the four 
openings within these two cavities. Three are situated at the entrance to 
the vena cava in such a way that they cannot prevent the blood contained 
in it from flowing into the right-hand cavity, and yet they effectively 
prevent it from flowing out. Three at the entrance to the arterial vein do 
just the opposite, readily permitting the blood in the right-hand cavity to 
pass into the lungs, but not permitting the blood in the lungs to return 
into it. Likewise two others at the entrance to the venous artery allow the 
blood in the lungs to flow into the left-hand cavity of the heart, but block 
its return; and three at the entrance to the great artery permit blood to 
leave the heart but prevent it from returning. There is no need to seek any 
reason for the number of these membranes beyond the fact that the 
opening to the venous artery, being oval because of its location, can 
easily be closed with two of them, whereas the other openings, being 
round, can be closed more effectively with three. I should like the reader 
also to observe that the great artery and the arterial vein have a much 
harder and firmer composition than the venous artery and the vena cava, 
and that the latter widen out before entering the heart to form two 
pouches, called the auricles, which are composed of flesh similar to that 
of the heart. He will observe that there is always more heat in the heart 
than in any other place in the body, and finally, that this heat is capable 
of causing a drop of blood to swell and expand as soon as it enters a 
cavity of the heart, just as liquids generally do when they are poured drop 
by drop into some vessel which is very hot. 

After that, I need say little in order to explain the movement of the 
heart. When its cavities are not full of blood, some blood necessarily 
flows from the vena cava into the right-hand cavity and from the venous 
artery into the left-hand cavity, for these two vessels are always full of 
blood and their entrances, which open into the heart, cannot be blocked. 
But as soon as two drops of blood have entered the heart in this way, one 
in each of its cavities, these drops, which must be very large because the 
openings through which they enter are very wide and the vessels from 
which they come are very full of blood, are rarefied and expand because 
of the heat they find there. In this way they make the whole heart swell, 


48 


49 


136 Discourse on the Method 


and they push against and close the five little doors at the entrance to the 
two vessels from which they come, thus preventing any more blood from 
descending to the heart. Continuing to become more and more rarefied, 
they push open the six other little doors at the entrance to the other two 
vessels, going out through them and thereby causing all the branches of 
the arterial vein and of the great artery to swell almost at the same instant 
as the heart. Immediately afterwards, the heart contracts, as do these 
arteries as well, because the blood that entered them grows cold, and 
their six little doors close again while the five doors of the vena cava and 


50 the venous artery reopen and allow the passage of two further drops of 


51 


blood, which immediately makes the heart and the arteries swell, exactly 
as before. And it is because the blood thus entering the heart passes 
through the two pouches called the auricles that their movement is 
contrary to that of the heart, and they contract when it swells. Now those 
who are ignorant of the force of mathematical demonstrations and 
unaccustomed to distinguishing true reasons from probable may be 
tempted to reject this explanation without examining it. To prevent this, 
I would advise them that the movement | have just explained follows 
from the mere arrangement of the parts of the heart (which can be seen 
with the naked eye), from the heat in the heart (which can be felt with the 
fingers), and from the nature of the blood (which can be known through 
observation). This movement follows just as necessarily as the movement 
of a clock follows from the force, position, and shape of its counter- 
weights and wheels. 

One may ask, however, why the blood in the veins is not used up as it 
flows continually into the heart, and why the arteries are never too full of 
blood, since all the blood that passes through the heart flows through 
them. To this I need give no reply other than that already published by an 
English physician, who must be praised for having broken the ice on 
this subject.' He is the first to teach that there are many small passages at 
the extremities of the arteries, through which the blood they receive from 
the heart enters the small branches of the veins, from there going 
immediately back to the heart, so that its course is nothing but a 
perpetual circulation. He proves this very effectively by reference to the 
normal practice of surgeons, who bind an arm moderately tightly above a 
vein they have opened, so as to make the blood flow out more 
abundantly than if they had not bound the arm. But just the opposite 
happens if they bind the arm below, between the hand and the opening, 
or even if they bind it very tightly above the opening. For it is obvious 
that a moderately tight tourniquet can prevent the blood that is already 


1 William Harvey (1578-1657), whose book on the circulation of the blood, De Motu 
Cordis, was published in 1628 and read by Descartes in 1632. 


Part Five 137 


in the arm from returning to the heart through the veins, but does not 
prevent fresh blood from coming through the arteries. There are two 
reasons for this: first, the arteries are situated below the veins and their 
walls are harder and hence less easily compressed; and second, the blood 
which comes from the heart tends to flow through the arteries to the 
hand with more force than it does in returning to the heart through the 
veins. And since this blood comes out of the arm through an opening in 
one of the veins, there must necessarily be some passages below the 
tourniquet (that is, towards the extremity of the arm) through which it 
may flow from the arteries. Harvey also proves very soundly what he says 
about the circulation of the blood by pointing to certain small mem- 
branes which are arranged in various places along the veins in such a way 
that they do not permit the blood to pass from the middle of the body 
towards the extremities but only let it return from the extremities 
towards the heart. He proves his theory, moreover, by an experiment 
which shows that all the blood in the body can flow out of it in a very 
short time through a single artery, even if the artery is tightly bound close 
to the heart and cut between the heart and the tourniquet so that no one 
could have any reason to imagine that the blood drained off comes from 
anywhere but the heart. 

But there are many other facts which prove that the true cause of this 
movement of the blood is the one I have given.' First, there is the 
difference we see between the blood which flows from the veins and that 
which flows from the arteries. This can result only from the fact that the 
blood is rarefied and, as it were, distilled in passing through the heart, 
and is therefore thinner, livelier and warmer just after leaving it (that is, 
when in the arteries) than a little before entering it (that is, when in the 
veins). And if you look closely you will find this difference to be more 
evident near the heart than in places further from it. Then there is the 
hardness of the membfanes of which the arterial vein and the great artery 
are composed: this shows well enough that the blood strikes against them 
with more force than against the veins. And why should the left-hand 
cavity of the heart and the great artery be larger and wider than the 
right-hand cavity and the arterial vein, if not because the blood in the 
venous artery, having been only in the lungs after passing through the 
heart, is thinner and more easily rarefied than that which comes 
immediately from the vena cava? And what could physicians learn by 
feeling the pulse if they did not know that, as the nature of the blood 
changes, it can be rarefied by the heat of the heart more or less strongly, 
and more or less quickly, than before? And if we examine how this heat is 


1 See Description of the Human Body (below, pp. 316ff) for Descartes’ criticism of 
Harvey’s explanation of the movement of the blood. 


52 


53 


54 


138 Discourse on the Method 


communicated to the other parts of the body, must we not acknowledge 
that this happens by means of the blood, which is reheated in passing 
through the heart and spreads from there through the whole body? So it 
is that if we remove the blood from some part of the body, we thereupon 
remove the heat as well; and even if the heart were as hot as glowing iron, 
it would not be able to reheat the feet and the hands as it does unless it 
continually sent new blood to these parts. Then, too, we know from this 
that the true function of respiration is to bring enough fresh air into the 
lungs to cause the blood entering there from the right-hand cavity of the 
heart, where it has been rarefied and almost changed into vapours, to 
thicken immediately into blood again before returning to the left-hand 
cavity. For if this did not happen the blood would not be fit to serve as 
fuel for the fire in the heart. This is confirmed by seeing that animals 
without lungs have only one cavity in their hearts, and that unborn 
children, who cannot use their lungs while enclosed within their mother’s 
womb, have an opening through which blood flows from the vena cava 
into the left-hand cavity of the heart, and a tube through which blood 
comes from the arterial vein into the great artery without passing 
through the lungs. Again, how would digestion take place in the stomach 
if the heart did not send heat there through the arteries, together with 
some of the most fluid parts of the blood which help to dissolve the food 
we have put there? And is it not easy to understand the action that 
converts the juice of this food into blood, if we consider that the blood 
passing in and out of the heart is distilled perhaps more than one or two 
hundred times each day? Again, what more do we need in order to 
explain nutrition and the production of the various humours present in 
the body? We need only say that as the blood is rarefied it flows with such 
force from the heart towards the extremities of the arteries that some of 
its parts come to rest in parts of the body where they drive out and 
displace other parts of the blood; and certain parts of the blood flow to 
some places rather than others according to the situation, shape, or 
minuteness of the pores that they encounter, just as sieves with holes of 
various sizes serve to separate different grains from each other. But the 
most remarkable of all these facts is the generation of the animal spirits: 
like a very fine! wind, or rather a very pure and lively flame, they rise 
continuously in great abundance from the heart into the brain, passing 
from there through the nerves to the muscles and imparting movement to 
all the parts of the body. The parts of the blood which are the most 
agitated and penetrating, and hence the best suited to compose these 
spirits, make their way to the brain rather than elsewhere. For this we 


1 See footnote 2, p. 100 above. 


Part Five 139 


need suppose no cause other than the fact that they are carried there by 
the arteries which come most directly from the heart. For according to 
the laws of mechanics, which are identical with the laws of nature, when 
many things tend to move together towards a place where there is not 
enough room for all of them (as when the parts of blood coming from the 
left-hand cavity of the heart all tend towards the brain), the weakest and 
least agitated must be pushed aside by the strongest, which thus arrive at 
that place on their own. 

1 explained all these matters in sufficient detail in the treatise | 
previously intended to publish.! And then I showed what structure the 
nerves and muscles of the human body must have in order to make the 
animal spirits inside them strong enough to move its limbs — as when we 
see severed heads continue to move about and bite the earth although 
they are no longer alive. I also indicated what changes must occur in 
the brain in order to cause waking, sleep and dreams; how light, sounds, 
smells, tastes, heat and the other qualities of external objects can imprint 
various ideas on the brain through the mediation of the senses; and how 
hunger, thirst, and the other internal passions can also send their ideas 
there. And I explained which part of the brain must be taken to be the 
‘common’ sense,” where these ideas are received; the memory, which 
preserves them; and the corporeal imagination, which can change them 
in various ways, form them into new ideas, and, by distributing the 
animal spirits to the muscles, make the parts of this body move in as 
many different ways as the parts of our bodies can move without being 
guided by the will, and in a manner which is just as appropriate to the 
objects of the senses and the internal passions. This will not seem at all 
strange to those who know how many kinds of automatons, or moving 
machines, the skill of man can construct with the use of very few parts, in 
comparison with the great multitude of bones, muscles, nerves, arteries, 
veins and all the other parts that are in the body of any animal. For they 
will regard this body as a machine which, having been made by the hands 
of God, is incomparably better ordered than any machine that can be 
devised by man, and contains in itself movements more wonderful than 
those in any such machine. 

I made special efforts to show that if any such machines had the organs 
and outward shape of a monkey or of some other animal that lacks 
reason, we should have no means of knowing that they did not possess 
entirely the same nature as these animals; whereas if any such machines 
bore a resemblance to our bodies and imitated our actions as closely as 
possible for all practical purposes, we should still have two very certain 


1 See footnote p. 132, above. 
2 Cf. Rules, above p. 41, and Treatise on Man, above pp. 104ff. 


55 


56 


57 


58 


140 Discourse on the Method 


means of recognizing that they were not real men. The first is that they 
could never use words, or put together other signs, as we do in order to 
declare our thoughts to others. For we can certainly conceive of a 
machine so constructed that it utters words, and even utters words which 
correspond to bodily actions causing a change in its organs (e.g. if you 
touch it in one spot it asks what you want of it, if you touch it in another 
it cries out that you are hurting it, and so on). But it is not conceivable 
that such a machine should produce different arrangements of words so 
as to give an appropriately meaningful answer to whatever is said in its 
presence, as the dullest of men can do. Secondly, even though such 
machines might do some things as well as we do them, or perhaps even 
better, they would inevitably fail in others, which would reveal that they 
were acting not through understanding but only from the disposition of 
their organs. For whereas reason is a universal instrument which can be 
used in all kinds of situations, these organs need some particular 
disposition for each particular action; hence it is for all practical 
purposes impossible for a machine to have enough different organs to 
make it act in all the contingencies of life in the way in which our reason 
makes us act. 

Now in just these two ways we can also know the difference between 
man and beast. For it is quite remarkable that there are no men so 
dull-witted or stupid — and this includes even madmen — that they are 
incapable of arranging various words together and forming an utterance 
from them in order to make their thoughts understood; whereas there is 
no other animal, however perfect and well-endowed it may be, that can 
do the like. This does not happen because they lack the necessary organs, 
for we see that magpies and parrots can utter words as we do, and yet 
they cannot speak as we do: that is, they cannot show that they are 
thinking what they are saying. On the other hand, men born deaf and 
dumb, and thus deprived of speech-organs as much as the beasts or even 
more so, normally invent their own signs to make themselves understood 
by those who, being regularly in their company, have the time to learn 
their language. This shows not merely that the beasts have less reason 
than men, but that they have no reason at all. For it patently requires very 
little reason to be able to speak; and since as much inequality can be 
observed among the animals of a given species as among human beings, 
and some animals are more easily trained than others, it would be 
incredible that a superior specimen of the monkey or parrot species 
should not be able to speak as well as the stupidest child — or at least as 
well as a child with a defective brain — if their souls were not completely 
different in nature from ours. And we must not confuse speech with the 
natural movements which express passions and which can be imitated by 


Part Six I4I 


machines as well as by animals. Nor should we think, like some of the 
ancients, that the beasts speak, although we do not understand their 
language. For if that were true, then since they have many organs that 
correspond to ours, they could make themselves understood by us as well 
as by their fellows. It is also a very remarkable fact that although many 
animals show more skill than we do in some of their actions, yet the same 
animals show none at all in many others; so what they do better does not 
prove that they have any intelligence, for if it did then they would have 
more intelligence than any of us and would excel us in everything. It 
proves rather that they have no intelligence at all, and that it is nature 
which acts in them according to the disposition of their organs. In the 
same way a clock, consisting only of wheels and springs, can count the 
hours and measure time more accurately than we can with all our 
wisdom. 

After that, I described the rational soul, and showed that, unlike the 
other things of which I had spoken, it cannot be derived in any way from 
the potentiality of matter, but must be specially created.! And I showed 
how it is not sufficient for it to be lodged in the human body like a 
helmsman in his ship, except perhaps to move its limbs, but that it must 
be more closely joined and united with the body in order to have, besides 
this power of movement, feelings and appetites like ours and so 
constitute a real man. Here I dwelt a little upon the subject of the soul, 
because it is of the greatest importance. For after the error of those who 
deny God, which I believe I have already adequately refuted, there is 
none that leads weak minds further from the straight path of virtue than 
that of imagining that the souls of the beasts are of the same nature as 
ours, and hence that after this present life we have nothing to fear or to 
hope for, any more than flies and ants. But when we know how much the 
beasts differ from us, we understand much better the arguments which 
prove that our soul is of a nature entirely independent of the body, and 
consequently that it is not bound to die with it. And since we cannot see 
any other causes which destroy the soul, we are naturally led to conclude 
that it is immortal. 


Part Six 


It is now three years since I reached the end of the treatise that contains 
all these things. I was beginning to revise it in order to put it in the hands 
of a publisher, when I learned that some persons to whom I defer and 
who have hardly less authority over my actions than my own reason has 
over my thoughts, had disapproved of a physical theory published a little 


1 The section of the Treatise on Man referred to here has not survived. 


59 


60 


61 


62 


142 Discourse on the Method 


while before by someone else.! I will not say that I accepted this theory, 
but only that before their condemnation I had noticed nothing in it that I 
could imagine to be prejudicial either to religion or to the state, and 
hence nothing that would have prevented me from publishing it myself, if 
reason had convinced me of it. This made me fear that there might be 
some mistake in one of my own theories, in spite of the great care I had 
always taken never to adopt any new opinion for which I had no certain 
demonstration, and never to write anything that might work to anyone’s 
disadvantage. That was enough to make me change my previous decision 
to publish my views. For although I had had very strong reasons for this 
decision, my inclination, which has always made me dislike the business 
of writing books, prompted me to find excuses enough for deciding 
otherwise. The reasons, on one side and the other, are such that not only 
do I have some interest in stating them here, but also the public may be 
interested to know what they are. 

I have never made much of the products of my own mind; and so long 
as the only fruits I gathered from the method I use were my own 
satisfaction regarding certain difficulties in the speculative sciences, or 
else my attempts to govern my own conduct by the principles I learned 
from it, I did not think I was obliged to write anything about it. For as 
regards conduct, everyone is so full of his own wisdom that we might find 
as many reformers as heads if permission to institute change in these 
matters were granted to anyone other than those whom God has set up as 
sovereigns over his people or those on whom he has bestowed sufficient 
grace and zeal to be prophets. As regards my speculations, although they 
pleased me very much, I realized that other people had their own which 
perhaps pleased them more. But as soon as I had acquired some general 
notions in physics and had noticed, as I began to test them in various 
particular problems, where they could lead and how much they differ 
from the principles used up to now, I believed that I could not keep them 


' secret without sinning gravely against the law which obliges us to do all 


in our power to secure the general welfare of mankind. For they opened 
my eyes to the possibility of gaining knowledge which would be very 
useful in life, and of discovering a practical philosophy which might 
replace the speculative philosophy taught in the schools. Through this 
philosophy we could know the power and action of fire, water, air, the 
stars, the heavens and all the other bodies in our environment, as 
distinctly as we know the various crafts of our artisans; and we could use 
this knowledge — as the artisans use theirs — for all the purposes for which 
it is appropriate, and thus make ourselves, as it were, the lords and 


1 Galileo, whose Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems was published in 
1632 and condemned by the Congregation of the Holy Office in 1633. 


Part Six 143 


masters of nature. This is desirable not only for the invention of 
innumerable devices which would facilitate our enjoyment of the fruits of 
the earth and all the goods we find there, but also, and most importantly, 
for the maintenance of health, which is undoubtedly the chief good and 
the foundation of all the other goods in this life. For even the mind 
depends so much on the temperament and disposition of the bodily 
organs that if it is possible to find some means of making men in general 
wiser and more skilful than they have been up till now, I believe we must 
look for it in medicine. It is true that medicine as currently practised does 
not contain much of any significant use; but without intending to 
disparage it, 1 am sure there is no one, even among its practitioners, who 
would not admit that all we know in medicine is almost nothing in 
comparison with what remains to be known, and that we might free 
ourselves from innumerable diseases, both of the body and of the mind, 
and perhaps even from the infirmity of old age, if we had sufficient 
knowledge of their causes and of all the remedies that nature has 
provided. Intending as I did to devote my life to the pursuit of such 
indispensable knowledge, I discovered a path which would, | thought, 
inevitably lead one to it, unless prevented by the brevity of life or the lack 
of observations.! And I judged that the best remedy against these two 
obstacles was to communicate faithfully to the public what little I had 
discovered, and to urge the best minds to try and make further progress 
by helping with the necessary observations, each according to his 
inclination and ability, and by communicating to the public everything 
they learn. Thus, by building upon the work of our predecessors and 
combining the lives and labours of many, we might make much greater 
progress working together than anyone could make on his own. 

I also noticed, regarding observations,! that the further we advance in 
our knowledge, the more necessary they become. At the beginning, rather 
than seeking those which are more unusual and highly contrived, it is 
better to resort only to those which, presenting themselves spontaneously 
to our senses, cannot be unknown to us if we reflect even a little. The 
reason for this is that the more unusual observations are apt to mislead us 
when we do not yet know the causes of the more common ones, and the 
factors on which they depend are almost always so special and so minute 
that it is very difficult to discern them. But the order I have adopted in 
this regard is the following. First I tried to discover in general the 
principles or first causes of everything that exists or can exist in the 
world. To this end I considered nothing but God alone, who created the 


1 Fr. expériences, a term which Descartes often uses when talking of scientific observa- 
tions, and which sometimes comes close to meaning ‘experiments’ in the modern sense 
(its root being derived from Lat. experior, ‘to test’). 


63 


64 


65 


66 


144 Discourse on the Method 


world; and I derived these principles only from certain seeds of truth 
which are naturally in our souls. Next I examined the first and most 
ordinary effects deducible from these causes. In this way, it seems to me, I 
discovered the heavens, the stars, and an earth; and, on the earth, water, 
air, fire, minerals, and other such things which, being the most common 
of all and the simplest, are consequently the easiest to know. Then, when 
I sought to descend to more particular things, I encountered such a 
variety that I did not think the human mind could possibly distinguish 
the forms or species of bodies that are on the earth from an infinity of 
others that might be there if it had been God’s will to put them there. 
Consequently I thought the only way of making these bodies useful to us 
was to progress to the causes by way of the effects and to make use of 
many special observations. And now, reviewing in my mind all the 
objects that have ever been present to my senses, I venture to say that | 
have never noticed anything in them which I could not explain quite 
easily by the principles I had discovered. But I must also admit that the 
power of nature is so ample and so vast, and these principles so simple 
and so general, that I notice hardly any particular effect of which I do not 
know at once that it can be deduced from the principles in many different 
ways; and my greatest difficulty is usually to discover in which of these 
ways it depends on them. I know no other means to discover this than by 
seeking further observations whose outcomes vary according to which of 
these ways provides the correct explanation. Moreover, I have now 
reached a point where I think I can see quite clearly what line we should 
follow in making most of the observations which serve this purpose; but I 
see also that they are of such a kind and so numerous that neither my 
dexterity nor my income (were it even a thousand times greater than it is) 
could suffice for all of them. And so the advances I make in the 
knowledge of nature will depend henceforth on the opportunities I get to 
make more or fewer of these observations. I resolved to make this known 
in the treatise I had written, and to show clearly how the public could 
benefit from such knowledge. This would oblige all who desire the 
general well-being of mankind — that is, all who are really virtuous, not 
virtuous only in appearance or merely in repute — both to communicate 
to me the observations they have already made and to assist me in 
seeking those which remain to be made. 

Since then, however, other considerations have made me change my 
mind. I have come to think that I must continue writing down anything | 
consider at all important, when I discover its truth, and that I should take 
as much care over these writings as I would if I intended to have them 
published. For this will give me all the more reason to examine them 
closely, as undoubtedly we always look more carefully at something we 


Part Six 145 


think is to be seen by others than at something we do only for ourselves; 
and often what seemed true to me when I first conceived it has looked 
false when I tried to put it on paper. This plan will also ensure both that I 
lose no opportunity to benefit the public if I can, and that if my writings 
have any value, those who get them after my death can make the most 
appropriate use of them. But I was determined not to agree to their 
publication during my lifetime, so that neither the opposition and 
controversy they might arouse, nor the reputation they might gain for 
me, would make me lose any of the time I planned to devote to my 
self-instruction. Every man is indeed bound to do what he can to procure 
the good of others, and a man who is of no use to anyone else is strictly 
worthless. Nevertheless it is also true that our concern ought to extend 
beyond the present, and that it is good to neglect matters which may 
profit the living when we aim to do other things which will benefit 
posterity even more. In any case I am willing to acknowledge that the 
little I have learned so far is almost nothing in comparison with that 
which I do not know but which I hope to be able to learn. Those who 
gradually discover the truth in the sciences are like people who become 67 
rich and find they have less trouble making large profits than they had in 
making much smaller ones when they were poorer. Or they may be 
compared with military commanders, whose forces tend to grow in 
proportion to their victories, but who need more skill to maintain their 
position after losing a battle than they do to take towns and provinces 
after winning one. For attempting to overcome all the difficulties and 
errors that prevent our arriving at knowledge of the truth is indeed a 
matter of fighting battles: we lose a battle whenever we accept some false 
opinion concerning an important question of general significance, and we 
need much more skill afterwards to regain our former position than we 
do to make good progress when we already have principles which are 
well-founded. For my part, if I have already discovered a few truths in the 
sciences (and I hope that the contents of this volume warrant the 
judgement that I have found some), I can say that these discoveries 
merely result from and depend upon my surmounting of five or six 
principal difficulties in battles where I reckon I had fortune on my side. I 
even venture to say that I think I need to win only two or three other such 
battles in order to achieve my aims completely, and that my age is not so 
far advanced that I may not in the normal course of nature still have the 
time to do this. But the more hopeful I am of being able to use my 68 
remaining years effectively, the more I think I am obliged to plan my time 
carefully; and many occasions for wasting time would undoubtedly arise 
if I published the fundamental principles of my physics. For although 
these principles are almost all so evident that they need only to be 


69 


70 


146 Discourse on the Method 


understood to be believed, and although I think I can demonstrate all of 
them, yet since it is impossible that they should accord with all the 
diverse opinions of other men, I foresee that I should often be distracted 
by the controversies they would arouse. 

It may be claimed that such controversies would be useful. Not only 
would they make me aware of my mistakes, but also they would enable 
others to have a better understanding of anything worthwhile that I may 
have discovered; and, as many people are able to see more than one 
alone, so these others might begin to make use of my discoveries and help 
me with theirs. But although I recognize that I am extremely prone to 
error, and I almost never trust the first thoughts that come to me, at the 
Same time my acquaintance with the objections that may be raised 
prevents me from expecting any benefit from them. For I have already 
had frequent experience of the judgements both of those I held to be my 
friends and of some I thought indifferent towards me, and even of certain 
others whose malice and envy would, I knew, make them eager enough 
to reveal what affection would hide from my friends. But it has rarely 
happened that an objection has been raised which I had not wholly 
foreseen, except when it was quite wide of the mark. Thus I have almost 
never encountered a critic of my views who did not seem to be either less 
rigorous or less impartial than myself. Nor have I ever observed that any 
previously unknown truth has been discovered by means of the disputa- 
tions practised in the schools. For so long as each side strives for victory, 
more effort is put into establishing plausibility than in weighing reasons 
for and against; and those who have long been good advocates do not 
necessarily go on to make better judges. 

As for the benefit that others might gain from the communication of 
my thoughts, this could not be so very great. For I have not yet taken 
them sufficiently far: I need to add many things to them before applying 
them in practice. And I think I can say without vanity that if anyone is 
capable of making these additions it must be myself rather than someone 
else — not that there may not be many minds in the world incomparably 
better than mine, but because no one can conceive something so well, and 
make it his own, when he learns it from someone else as when he 
discovers it himself. This is especially true in the case under considera- 
tion. I have often explained some of my opinions to highly intelligent 
persons who seemed to understand them quite distinctly when I told 
them about them; but, when they repeated them, I observed that they 
almost always changed them in such a way that I could no longer 
acknowledge them as my own. For this reason I should like to beg future 
generations never to believe that I am the source of an opinion they hear 
unless I have published it myself. I do not wonder at the absurdities 


Part Six 147 


attributed to all the ancient philosophers whose writings we do not 
possess; nor do I conclude from these attributions that their thoughts 
were highly unreasonable. As they were some of the best minds of their 
time, I conclude rather that their thoughts have been misreported. We see 
too that it has almost never happened that any of their followers has 
surpassed them; and I am sure that Aristotle’s most passionate contem- 
porary followers would count themselves fortunate if they had as much 
knowledge of nature as he had, even on the condition that they should 
never know any more. They are like ivy, which never seeks to climb 
higher than the trees which support it, and often even grows downward 
after reaching the tree-tops. For it seems to me that they too take 
downward steps, or become somehow less knowledgeable than if they 
refrained from study, when, not content with knowing everything which 
is intelligibly explained in their author’s writings, they wish in addition to 
find there the solution to many problems about which he says nothing 
and about which perhaps he never thought. But this manner of philo- 
sophizing is very convenient for those with only mediocre minds, for the 
obscurity of the distinctions and principles they use makes it possible for 
them to speak about everything as confidently as if they knew it, and to 
defend all they say against the most subtle and clever thinkers without 
anyone having the means to convince them that they are wrong. In this 
they seem to resemble a blind man who, in order to fight without 
disadvantage against someone who can see, lures him into the depths of a 
very dark cellar. These philosophers, I may say, have an interest in my 
refraining from publishing the principles of the philosophy I use. For my 
principles are so very simple and evident that in publishing them I should, 
as it were, be opening windows and admitting daylight into that cellar 
‘where they have gone down to fight. But even the best minds have no 
reason to wish to know my principles. For if they want to be able to 
speak about everything and acquire the reputation of being learned, they 
will achieve this more readily by resting content with plausibility, which 
can be found without difficulty in all kinds of subjects, than by seeking 
the truth; for the truth comes to light only gradually in certain subjects, 
and it obliges us frankly to confess our ignorance where other subjects 
are concerned. But if they prefer the knowledge of some few truths to the 
vanity of appearing ignorant of nothing (and undoubtedly the former is 
preferable), and if they wish to follow a plan similar to mine, then in that 
case I need tell them nothing more than I have already said in this 
discourse. For if they are capable of making further progress than I have 
made, they will be all the more capable of discovering for themselves 
everything I think I have discovered. Inasmuch as I have examined 
everything in an orderly manner, it is certain that what still remains for 


71 


72 


73 


148 Discourse on the Method 


me to discover is in itself more difficult and more hidden than anything | 
have thus far been able to discover; and they would have much less 
pleasure in learning it from me than in learning it for themselves. Besides, 
by investigating easy matters first and then moving on gradually to more 
difficult ones, they will acquire habits more useful to them than all my 
instructions could be. For my part, I am convinced that if from my youth 
I had been taught all the truths I have since sought to demonstrate, and so 
had learned them without any difficulty, I should perhaps never have 
known any others; or at least I should never have acquired the habit and 
facility, which I think I have, for always finding new truths whenever I 
apply myself in searching for them. In short, if there was ever a task 
which could not be accomplished so well by someone other than the 
person who began it, it is the one on which I am working. 

True, as regards observations which may help in this work, one man 
could not possibly make them all. But also he could not usefully employ 
other hands than his own, except those of artisans, or such persons as he 
could pay, who would be led by the hope of gain (a most effective motive) 
to do precisely what he ordered them to do. For voluntary helpers, who 
might offer to help him from curiosity or a desire to learn, usually 
promise more than they achieve and make fine proposals which never 
come to anything. In addition, they would inevitably wish to be rewarded 
by having certain difficulties explained to them, or at any rate by 
compliments and useless conversation, which could not but waste a lot of 
his time. And as for the observations that others have already made, even 
if they were willing to communicate them to him (something which those 
who call them ‘secrets’ would never do), they are for the most part bound 
up with so many details or superfluous ingredients that it would be very 
hard for him to make out the truth in them. Besides, he would find almost 
all of these observations to be so badly explained or indeed so mistaken — 
because those who made them were eager to have them appear to 
conform with their principles — that it would simply not be worthwhile 
for him to spend the time required to pick out those which he might find 
useful. So if there were someone in the world whom we knew for sure to 
be capable of making discoveries of the greatest possible importance and 
public utility, and whom other men accordingly were eager to help in 
every way to achieve his ends, I do not see how they could do anything 
for him except to contribute towards the expenses of the observations 
that he would need and, further, prevent unwelcome visitors from 
wasting his free time. But I am not so presumptuous that I wish to 
promise anything extraordinary, nor do I entertain thoughts so vain as 
the supposition that the public ought to take a great interest in my 
projects. Apart from that, I am not so mean-spirited that I would 


Part Six 149 


willingly accept from anyone a favour that I might be thought not to 
deserve. 

All these considerations taken together caused me to decide, three 
years ago, that I did not wish to publish the treatise I had ready then, and 
made me resolve not to publish any other work during my lifetime which 
was so general in scope or by which the foundations of my physics might 
be understood. Since then, however, two further reasons have compelled 
me to include here some essays on particular topics and to give to the 
public some account of my actions and plans. The first is that, if I failed 
to do so, then many who knew of my earlier intention to publish certain 
writings might suppose that my reasons for not doing so were more 
discreditable to me than they are. I am not excessively fond of glory — in- 
deed if I dare to say so, I dislike it in so far as I regard it as opposed to 
that tranquillity which I value above everything else. At the same time | 
have never tried to conceal my actions as if they were crimes, or taken 
many precautions to remain unknown. For if I had done this I thought I 
would do myself an injustice, and moreover that would have given me 
a certain sort of disquiet, which again would have been opposed to the 
perfect peace of mind I am seeking. And since my indifference as to 
whether I was well-known or not made it unavoidable that I should gain 
some sort of reputation, I thought I ought to do my best at least to avoid 
getting a bad one. The other reason compelling me to write this is that 
every day I am becoming more and more aware of the delay which my 
project of self-instruction is suffering because of the need for innumerable 
observations which I cannot possibly make without the help of others. 
Although I do not flatter myself with any expectation that the public will 
share my interests, yet at the same time I am unwilling to be so unfaithful 
to myself as to give those who come after me cause to reproach me some 
day on the grounds that I could have left them many far better things if I 
had not been so remiss in making them understand how they could 
contribute to my projects. 

I thought it convenient for me to choose certain subjects which, 
without being highly controversial and without obliging me to reveal 
more of my principles than I wished, would nonetheless show quite 
clearly what I can, and what I cannot, achieve in the sciences. I cannot tell 
if I have succeeded in this, and I do not wish to anticipate anyone’s 
judgements about my writings by speaking about them myself. But I shall 
be very glad if they are examined. In order to provide more 
opportunity for this, I beg all who have any objections to take the trouble 
to send them to my publisher, and when he informs me about them I shall 
attempt to append my reply at the same time, so that readers can see both 
sides together, and decide the truth all the more easily. I do not promise 


74 


75 


76 


77 


150 Discourse on the Method 


to make very long replies, but only to acknowledge my errors very 
frankly if I recognize them; and where I cannot see them I shall simply 
say what I consider is required for defending what I have written, 
without introducing any new material, so as to avoid getting endlessly 
caught up in one topic after another. 

Should anyone be shocked at first by some of the statements I make at 
the beginning of the Optics and the Meteorology because I call them 
‘suppositions’ and do not seem to care about proving them, let him have 
the patience to read the whole book attentively, and IJ trust that he will be 
satisfied. For I take my reasonings to be so closely interconnected that 
just as the last are proved by the first, which are their causes, so the first 
are proved by the last, which are their effects. It must not be supposed 
that I am here committing the fallacy that the logicians call ‘arguing in a 
circle’. For as experience makes most of these effects quite certain, the 
causes from which I deduce them serve not so much to prove them as to 
explain them; indeed, quite to the contrary, it is the causes which are 
proved by the effects. And I have called them ‘suppositions’ simply to 
make it known that I think I can deduce them from the primary truths | 
have expounded above; but I have deliberately avoided carrying out 
these deductions in order to prevent certain ingenious persons from 
taking the opportunity to construct, on what they believe to be my 
principles, some extravagant philosophy for which I shall be blamed. 
These persons imagine that they can learn in a single day what it has 
taken someone else twenty years to think out, as soon as he has told them 
only two or three words about it; whereas the more penetrating and 
acute they are, the more prone to error they are and the less capable of 
truth. As to the opinions that are wholly mine, | do not apologize for 
their novelty. If the reasons for them are considered well, | am sure they 
will be found to be so simple and so much in agreement with common 
sense as to appear less extraordinary and strange than any other views 
that people may hold on the same subjects. I do not boast of being the 
first to discover any of them, but I do claim to have accepted them not 
because they have, or have not, been expressed by others, but solely 
because reason has convinced me of them. 

If artisans are not immediately able to put into operation the invention 
explained in the Optics, I do not think it can on that account be said to be 
defective.! For much skill and practice are needed for making and 
adjusting the machines I have described, and although my description 
does not omit any details, I should be no less astonished if they succeeded 
at the first attempt than if someone could learn to play the lute excellently 


1 Here Descartes refers to the method of cutting lenses described in Discourse 10 of the 


Optics. 


Part Six I§1 


in a single day simply by being given a good fingering chart. And if I am 
writing in French, my native language, rather than Latin, the language of 
my teachers, it is because I expect that those who use only their natural 
reason in all its purity will be better judges of my opinions than those 
who give credence only to the writings of the ancients. As to those who 
combine good sense with application — the only judges I wish to have — I 
am sure they will not be so partial to Latin that they will refuse to listen 
to my arguments because I expound them in the vernacular. 

For the rest, I do not wish to speak here in detail about ‘the further 
progress I hope to make in the sciences, or to commit myself in the eyes of 
the public by making any promise that I am not sure of fulfilling. I will 
say only that I have resolved to devote the rest of my life to nothing other 
than trying to acquire some knowledge of nature from which we may 
derive rules in medicine which are more reliable than those we have had 
up till now. Moreover, my inclination makes me so strongly opposed to 
all other projects, and especially to those which can be useful to some 
persons only by harming others, that if circumstances forced me to 
engage in any such pursuit, I do not think I would be capable of 
succeeding in it. Of this I make here a public declaration, fully recogniz- 
ing that it cannot serve to make me eminent in the world; but then I have 
no desire to be such. And I shall always hold myself more obliged to 
those by whose favour I enjoy uninterrupted leisure than to any who 
might offer me the most honourable positions in the world. 


78 


AT VI 
81 


(82) 


83 


OPTICS 


DISCOURSE ONE: LIGHT 


The conduct of our life depends entirely on our senses, and since sight is 
the noblest and most comprehensive of the senses, inventions which serve 
to increase its power are undoubtedly among the most useful there can 
be. And it is difficult to find any such inventions which do more to 
increase the power of sight than those wonderful telescopes which, 
though in use for only a short time, have already revealed a greater 
number of new stars and other new objects above the earth than we had 
seen there before. Carrying our vision much further than our forebears 
could normally extend their imagination, these telescopes seem to have 
opened the way for us to attain a knowledge of nature much greater and 
more perfect than they possessed . . . But inventions of any complexity do 
not reach their highest degree of perfection right away, and this one is 
still sufficiently problematical to give me cause to write about it. And 
since the construction of the things of which I shall speak must depend on 
the skill of craftsmen, who usually have little formal education, I shall try 
to make myself intelligible to everyone; and | shall try not to omit 
anything, or to assume anything that requires knowledge of other 
sciences. This is why I shall begin by explaining light and light-rays; then, 
having briefly described the parts of the eye, I shall give a detailed 
account of how vision comes about; and, after noting all the things which 
are capable of making vision more perfect, I shall show how they can be 
aided by the inventions which I shall describe. 

Now since my only reason for speaking of light here is to explain how 
its rays enter into the eye, and how they may be deflected by the various 
bodies they encounter, I need not attempt to say what is its true nature. It 
will, I think, suffice if 1 use two or three comparisons in order to facilitate 
that conception of light which seems most suitable for explaining all 
those of its properties that we know through experience and then for 
deducing all the others that we cannot observe so easily. In this I am 
imitating the astronomers, whose assumptions are almost all false or 
uncertain, but who nevertheless draw many very true and certain 


152 


Optics 1$3 


consequences from them because they are related to various observations 
they have made. 

No doubt you have had the experience of walking at night over rough 
ground without a light, and finding it necessary to use a stick in order to 
guide yourself. You may then have been able to notice that by means of 
this stick you could feel the various objects situated around you, and that 
you could even tell whether they were trees or stones or sand or water or 
grass or mud or any other such thing. It is true that this kind of sensation 
is somewhat confused and obscure in those who do not have long 
practice with it. But consider it in those born blind, who have made use 
of it all their lives: with them, you will find, it is so perfect and so exact 
that one might almost say that they see with their hands, or that their 
stick is the organ of some sixth sense given to them in place of sight. In 
order to draw a comparison from this, I would have you consider the 
light in bodies we call ‘luminous’ to be nothing other than a certain 
movement, or very rapid and lively action, which passes to our eyes 
through the medium of the air and other transparent bodies, just as the 
movement or resistance of the bodies encountered by a blind man passes 
to his hand by means of his stick. In the first place this will prevent you 
from finding it strange that this light can extend its rays instantaneously 
from the sun to us. For you know that the action by which we move one 
end of a stick must pass instantaneously to the other end, and that the 
action of light would have to pass from the heavens to the earth in the 
same way, even though the distance in this case is much greater than that 
between the ends of a stick. Nor will you find it strange that by means of 
this action we can see all sorts of colours. You may perhaps even be 
prepared to believe that in the bodies we call ‘coloured’ the colours are 
nothing other than the various ways in which the bodies receive light and 
reflect it against our eyes. You have only to consider that the differences a 
blind man notes between trees, rocks, water and similar things by means 
of his stick do not seem any less to him than the differences between red, 
yellow, green and all the other colours seem to us. And yet in all those 
bodies the differences are nothing other than the various ways of moving 
the stick or of resisting its movements. Hence you will have reason to 
conclude that there is no need to suppose that something material passes 
from objects to our eyes to make us see colours and light, or even that 
there is something in the objects which resembles the ideas or sensations 
that we have of them. In just the same way, when a blind man feels 
bodies, nothing has to issue from the bodies and pass along his stick to 
his hand; and the resistance or movement of the bodies, which is the sole 
cause of the sensations he has of them, is nothing like the ideas he forms 
of them. By this means, your mind will be delivered from all those little 


84 


85 


86 


87 


154 Optics 


images flitting through the air, called ‘intentional forms’,! which so 
exercise the imagination of the philosophers. You will even find it easy to 
settle the current philosophical debate concerning the origin of the action 
which causes visual perception. For, just as our blind man can feel the 
bodies around him not only through the action of these bodies when they 
move against his stick, but also through the action of his hand when they 
do nothing but resist the stick, so we must acknowledge that the objects 
of sight can be perceived not only by means of the action in them which is 
directed towards our eyes, but also by the action in our eyes which is 
directed towards them. Nevertheless, because the latter action is nothing 
other than light, we must note that it is found only in the eyes of those 
creatures which can see in the dark, such as cats, whereas a man normally 
sees only through the action which comes from the objects. For experi- 
ence shows us that these objects must be luminous or illuminated in order 
to be seen, and not that our eyes must be luminous or illuminated in 
order to see them. But because our blind man’s stick differs greatly from 
the air and the other transparent bodies through the medium of which we 
see, | must make use of yet another comparison. 

Consider a wine-vat at harvest time, full to the brim with half-pressed 
grapes, in the bottom of which we have made one or two holes through 
which the unfermented wine can flow. Now observe that, since there is 
no vacuum in nature (as nearly all philosophers acknowledge), and yet 
there are many pores in all the bodies we perceive around us (as 
experience can show quite clearly), it is necessary that these pores be 
filled with some very subtle and very fluid matter, which extends without 
interruption from the heavenly bodies to us. Now, if you compare this 
subtle matter with the wine in the vat, and compare the less fluid or 
coarser parts of the air and the other transparent bodies with the bunches 
of grapes which are mixed in with the wine, you will readily understand 
the following. The parts of wine at one place tend to go down in a 
straight line through one hole at the very instant it is opened, and at the 
same time through the other hole, while the parts at other places also 
tend at the same time to go down through these two holes, without these 
actions being impeded by each other or by the resistance of the bunches 
of grapes in the vat. This happens even though the bunches support each 
other and so do not tend in the least to go down through the holes, as 
does the wine, and at the same time they can even be moved in many 
other ways by the bunches which press upon them. In the same way, all 
the parts of the subtle matter in contact with the side of the sun facing us 


1 A reference to the scholastic doctrine that material objects transmit to the soul ‘forms’ or 
‘images’ (Fr. espéces, Lat. species) resembling them. 
2 A diagram of the wine-vat is omitted here. 


Optics 155 


tend in a straight line towards our eyes at the very instant they are 
opened, without these parts impeding each other, and even without their 
being impeded by the coarser parts of the transparent bodies which lie 
between them. This happens whether these bodies move in other ways — 
like the air which is almost always agitated by some wind — or are 
motionless — say, like glass or crystal. And note here that it is necessary to 
distinguish between the movement and the action or the tendency to 
move. For we may very easily conceive that the parts of wine at one place 
should tend towards one hole and at the same time towards the other, 
even though they cannot actually move towards both holes at the same 
time, and that they should tend exactly in a straight line towards one and 
towards the other, even though they cannot move exactly in a straight 
line because of the bunches of grapes which are between them. In the 
Same way, considering that the light of a luminous body must be 
regarded as being not so much its movement as its action, you must think 
of the rays of light as nothing other than the lines along which this action 
tends. Thus there is an infinity of such rays which come from all the 
points of a luminous body towards all the points of the bodies it 
illuminates, just as you can imagine an infinity of straight lines along 
which the ‘actions’ coming from all the points of the surface of the wine 
tend towards one hole, and an infinity of others along which the ‘actions’ 
coming from the same points tend also towards the other hole, without 
either impeding the other. 

Moreover, these rays must always be imagined to be exactly straight 
when they pass through a single transparent body which is uniform 
throughout. But when they meet certain other bodies, they are liable to 
be deflected by them, or weakened, in the same way that the movement 
of a ball or stone thrown into the air is deflected by the bodies it 
encounters. For it is very easy to believe that the action or tendency to 
move (which, I have said, should be taken for light) must in this respect 
obey the same laws as motion itself. In order that I may give a complete 
account of this third comparison, consider that a ball passing through the 
air may encounter bodies that are soft or hard or fluid. If these bodies 
are soft, they completely stop the ball and check its movement, as when it 
strikes linen sheets or sand or mud. But if they are hard, they send the ball 
in another direction without stopping it, and they do so in many different 
ways. For their surface may be quite even and smooth, or rough and 
uneven; if even, either flat or curved; if uneven, its unevenness may consist 
merely in its being composed of many variously curved parts, each quite 
smooth in itself, or also in its having many different angles or points, or 
some parts harder than others, or parts which are moving (their 
movements being varied in a thousand imaginable ways). And it must be 
noted that the ball, besides moving in the simple and ordinary way which 


88 


89 


90 


92. 


93 


156 Optics 


takes it from one place to another, may move in yet a second way, 
turning on its axis, and that the speed of the latter movement may have 
many different relations with that of the former. Thus, when many balls 
coming from the same direction meet a body whose surface is completely 
smooth and even, they are reflected uniformly and in the same order, so 
that if this surface is completely flat they keep the same distance between 
them after having met it as they had beforehand; and if it is curved 
inward or outward they come towards each other or go away from each 
other in the same order, more or less, on account of this curvature... It 
is necessary to consider, in the same manner, that there are bodies which 
break up the light-rays that meet them and take away all their force 
(viz., bodies called ‘black’, which have no colour other than that of 
shadows); and there are others which cause the rays to be reflected, some 
in the same order as they receive them (viz. bodies with highly polished 
surfaces, which can serve as mirrors, both flat and curved), and others in 
many directions in complete disarray. Among the latter, again, some 
bodies cause the rays to be reflected without bringing about any other 
change in their action (viz. bodies we call ‘white’), and others bring about 
an additional change similar to that which the movement of a ball 
undergoes when we graze it (viz. bodies which are red, or yellow, or blue 
or some other such colour). For I believe I can determine the nature of 
each of these colours, and reveal it experimentally; but this goes beyond 
the limits of my subject.! All I need to do here is to point out that the 
light-rays falling on bodies which are coloured and not polished are 
usually reflected in every direction even if they come from only a single 
direction . . . Finally, consider that the rays are also deflected, in the same 
way as the ball just described, when they fall obliquely on the surface of a 
transparent body and penetrate this body more or less easily than the 
body from which they come. This mode of deflection is called ‘refrac- 
tion’. 


DISCOURSE TWO: REFRACTION 


Later on we shall need to know how to determine exactly the quantity of 
this refraction, and since the comparison I have just used enables this to 
be understood quite easily, I think it appropriate for me to try to explain 
it here without more ado. I shall speak first about reflection, in order to 
make it easier to understand refraction. Let us suppose that a ball 
impelled by a tennis racquet from A to B meets at point B the surface of 
the ground CBE, which stops its further passage and causes it to be 
deflected; and let us see in what direction it will go [Fig. 1]. To avoid 


1 Cf. Description of the Human Body, p. 323 below. 


1§7 


getting involved in new difficulties, let us assume that the ground is 
perfectly flat and hard, and that the ball always travels at a constant 
speed, both in its downward passage and in rebounding, leaving aside 
entirely the question of the power which continues to move it when it is 
no longer in contact with the racquet, and without considering any effect 
of its weight, size or shape. For there is no point in going into such details 
here, since none of these factors is involved in the action of light to 
which the present inquiry must be related. It is only necessary to note that 
the power, whatever it may be, which causes the ball to continue moving 
is different from that which determines it to move in one direction rather 
than another. It is very easy to recognize this from the fact that the 
movement of the ball depends upon the force with which it has been 
impelled by the racquet, and this same force could have made it move in 
any other direction as easily as towards B; whereas the ball’s tending 
towards B is determined by the position of the racquet, which could have 
determined the ball in the same way even if a different force had moved 
it. This shows already that it is not impossible for the ball to be deflected 
by its encounter with the ground, and hence that there could be a change 
in its determination to tend towards B without any change in the force of 
its movement, since these are two different things. Consequently we must 
not imagine, as many of our philosophers do, that it is necessary for the 
ball to stop at point B for a moment before returning towards F. For if its 
motion were once interrupted by such a halt, no cause could be found 
which would make it start up again afterwards. Moreover, it must be 
noted that not only the determination to move in a certain direction but 
also the motion itself, and in general any sort of quantity, can be divided 
into all the parts of which we can imagine that it is composed. And we 
can easily imagine that the determination of the ball to move from A 
towards B is composed of two others, one making it descend from line 
AF towards line CE and the other making it at the same time go from the 


94 


95 


96 


97 


158 Optics 


left AC towards the right FE, so that these two determinations joined 
together direct it to B along the straight line AB. And then it is easy to 
understand that its encounter with the ground can prevent only one of 
these two determinations, leaving the other quite unaffected. For it must 
indeed prevent the one which made the ball descend from AF towards 
CE, because the ground occupies all the space below CE. But why should 
it prevent the other, which made the ball move to the right, seeing that it 
is not at all opposed to the determination in that direction? So, to 
discover in precisely what direction the ball must rebound, let us describe 
a circle, with its centre at B, which passes through point A; and let us say 
that in as much time as the ball will take to move from A to B, it must 
inevitably return from B to a certain point on the circumference of the 
circle. This holds in so far as the circumference contains all the points 
which are as far from B as A is, and the ball is supposed to be moving 
always at a constant speed. Next, in order to determine precisely to 
which point on the circumference the ball must return, let us draw three 
straight lines AC, HB, and FE, perpendicular to CE, so that the distance 
between AC and HB is neither greater nor less than that between HB and 
FE. And let us say that in as much time as the ball took to move towards 
the right side from A (one of the points on the line AC) to B (one of those 
on the line HB), it must also advance from the line HB to some point on 
the line FE. For all the points on the line FE are equidistant from the 
corresponding points on HB, as are those on line AC; and also the ball is 
as much determined to advance towards that side as it was before. So it is 
that the ball cannot arrive simultaneously both at some point on the line 
FE and at some point on the circumference of the circle AFD, unless this 
point is either D or F, as these are the only two points where the 
circumference and the line intersect. Accordingly, since the ground 
prevents the ball from passing towards D, it is necessary to conclude that 
it must inevitably go towards F. And so you can easily see how reflection 
takes place, namely at an angle always equal to the one we call the angle 
of incidence. In the same way, if a light-ray coming from point A falls at 
point B on the surface of a flat mirror CBE, it is reflected towards F in 
such manner that the angle of reflection FBE is neither greater nor less 
than the angle of incidence ABC. 

We come now to refraction. First let us suppose that a ball impelled 
from A towards B encounters at point B not the surface of the earth, but a 
linen sheet CBE which is so thin and finely woven that the ball has 
enough force to puncture it and pass right through, losing only some of 
its speed (say, a half) in doing so. Now given this, in order to know what 
path it must follow, let us consider again that its motion is entirely 
different from its determination to move in one direction rather than 


Optics 159 


another — from which it follows that the quantity of these two factors 
must be examined separately. And let us also consider that, of the two 
parts of which we can imagine this determination to be composed, only 
the one which was making the ball tend in a downward direction can be 
changed in any way through its colliding with the sheet, while the one 
which was making the ball tend to the right must always remain the same 
as it was, because the sheet offers no opposition at all to the determina- 
tion in this direction. Then, having described the circle AFD with its 
centre at B [Fig. 2], and having drawn at right angles to CBE the three 
straight lines AC, HB, FE so that the distance between FE and HB is twice 
that between HB and AC, we shall see that the ball must tend towards the 
point I. For, since the ball loses half its speed in passing through the sheet 
CBE, it must take twice as much time to descend from B to some point on 
the circumference of the circle AFD as it took to go from A to B above the 
sheet. And since it loses none of its former determination to advance to 
the right, in twice the time it took to pass from the line AC 
to HB it must cover twice the distance in the same direction, and con- 
sequently it must arrive at some point on the straight line FE simulta- 
neously with its reaching some point on the circumference of the circle 
AFD. This would be impossible if it did not go towards I, as this is the 
only point below the sheet CBE where the circle AFD and the straight line 
FE intersect. 


Fig. 2 


Now let us suppose that the ball coming from A towards D does not 
strike a sheet at point B, but rather a body of water, the surface of which 
reduces its speed by exactly a half, as did the sheet. The other conditions 
being given as before, I say that this ball must pass from B in a straight 
line not towards D, but towards I. For, in the first place, it is certain that 
the surface of the water must deflect it towards that point in the same 


98 


99 


I0O 


160 Optics 


way as the sheet, seeing that it reduces the force of the ball by the same 
amount, and that it is opposed to the ball in the same direction. Then, as 
for the rest of the body of water which fills all the space between B and I, 
although it resists the ball more or less than did the air which we 
supposed there before, we should not say for this reason that it must 
deflect it more or less. For the water may open up to make way for the 
ball just as easily in one direction as in another, at least if we always 
assume, as we do, that the ball’s course is not changed by its heaviness or 
lightness, or by its size or shape or any other such extraneous cause. And 
we may note here that the deflection of the ball by the surface of the 
water or the sheet is greater, the more oblique the angle at which it 
encounters it, so that if it encounters it at a right angle (as when it is 
impelled from H towards B) it must pass beyond in a straight line 
towards G without being deflected at all. But if it is impelled along a line 
such as AB [Fig. 3], which is so sharply inclined to the surface of the 
water or sheet CBE that the line FE (drawn as before) does not intersect 
the circle AD, the ball ought not to penetrate it at all, but ought to 
rebound from its surface B towards the air L, in the same way as if it had 
struck the earth at that point. People have sometimes experienced this to 
their regret when, firing artillery pieces towards the bottom of a river for 
fun, they have wounded those on the shore at the other side. 


Bt 
ee, > 
: tb 
a. .. 
— —— a 
eS 


t ae ae ngs fx. ‘tye toy te 
OTN hes he Uys 


, 


Fig. 3 


But let us make yet another assumption here, and suppose that the ball, 
having been first impelled from A to B, is again impelled at point B by the 
racquet CBE which increases the force of its motion, say by a third, so 
that it can then make as much headway in two seconds as it previously 
made in three. This will have the same effect as if the ball were to meet at 
point B a body of such nature that it could pass through its surface CBE 
one-third again more easily than through the air [Fig. 4]. And it follows 
manifestly from what has already been demonstrated that if you describe 
the circle AD as before, and the lines AC, HB, FE so that there is a third 


Optics 161 


la 


YY Le 


Fig. 4 


less distance between FE and HB than between HB and AC, then point I, 
where the straight line FE and the circular line AD intersect, will indicate 
the position towards which the ball must be deflected when at point B. 

Now we can also draw the converse of this conclusion and say that 
since the ball which comes in a straight line from A to B is deflected when 
at point B and moves on towards I, this means that the force or ease with 
which it penetrates the body CBE] is related to that with which it leaves 
the body ACBE as the distance between AC and HB is related to that 
between HB and FI — that is, as the line CB is to BE. 

Finally, in so far as the action of light in this respect obeys the same 
laws as the movement of the ball, it must be said that when its rays pass 
obliquely from one transparent body into another, which they penetrate 
more or less easily than the first, they are deflected in such a way that 
their inclination to the surface between these bodies is always less sharp 
on the side of the more easily penetrated body, and the degree of this 
inclination varies exactly in proportion to the varying degrees of 
penetrability of the respective bodies.' Only it must be noted carefully that 
this inclination has to be measured by the quantity of the straight lines 
(CB or AH, EB or IG, and the like) compared to each other, not by that of 
angles such as ABH or GBI, and still less by that of angles like DBI which 
we call ‘angles of refraction’. For the ratio or proportion between these 
angles varies with all the different inclinations of the rays, whereas that 
between the lines AH and IG, or the like, remains the same in all 
refractions caused by the same bodies. Thus, for example [Fig. 5], 
suppose a ray passes through the air from A towards B and, meeting the 
surface of a lens CBR at point B, is deflected towards I in this lens; and 


1 Without stating it explicitly, Descartes here enunciates the law now known as Snell’s 
Law, according to which sin i=n sin r, where j is the angle of incidence, r the angle of 
refraction, and m a constant specific to the refractive medium. Cf. letter to Mersenne, 
June 1632. 


IOI 


I02 


103 


162 


Fig. 5 


suppose another ray coming from K towards B is deflected towards L, 
and another coming from P towards R is deflected towards S. In this case 
there must be the same proportion between the lines KM and LN, or PQ 
and ST, as between AH and IG, but not the same between the angles 
KBM and LBN, or PRQ and SRT, as between ABH and IBG. 

So now you see the way in which refractions have to be measured. 
Although we need to refer to experience in order to determine their 
quantity, in so far as it depends on the particular nature of the bodies in 
which they occur, nonetheless we can do this easily enough and with 
sufficient certainty since all refractions are reduced in this way to a 
common measure. In fact, to discover all the refractions occurring at a 
given surface, it suffices to examine only those of a single ray, and we can 
avoid every error if in addition we examine the refractions in several 
other rays. So, if we wish to know the quantity of the refractions which 
occur at the surface CBR, separating the air AKP from the lens LIS, we 
need only determine the refraction of the ray ABI by examining the 
proportion between lines AH and IG. Then, if we suspect we have failed 
in this experiment, we must determine the refraction in several other 
rays, like KBL or PRS; and if we find the same proportion between KM 
and LN, and between PQ and ST, as between AH and IG, we shall have 
no further cause to doubt the truth of our observation. 

When you make these observations, however, you will perhaps be 
amazed to find that light-rays are more sharply inclined in air than in 
water, at the surfaces where their refraction occurs, and still more in 
water than in glass; while just the opposite occurs in the case of a ball, 
which is inclined more sharply in water than in air, and which cannot 
pass through glass at all. For example [Fig. 6], if a ball impelled through 
the air from A towards B meets a surface of water CBE at point B, it will 
be deflected from B towards V; and in the case of a ray, it will go in quite 
a different direction, from B towards I. You will no longer find this 
strange, however, if you recall the nature that I ascribed to light, when | 


Optics 163 


Fig. 6 


said it is nothing but a certain movement or an action received in a very 
subtle matter which fills the pores of other bodies. And you should 
consider too that, just as a ball loses more of its motion in striking a soft 
body than a hard one and rolls less easily on a carpet than on a 
completely bare table, so the action of this subtle matter can be impeded 
much more by the parts of the air (which, being as it were soft and badly 
joined, do not offer it much resistance) than by those of water, which 
offer it more resistance; and still more by those of water than by those of 
glass, or of crystal. Thus, in so far as the minute parts of a transparent 
body are harder and firmer, the more easily they allow the light to pass; 
for the light does not have to drive any of them out of their places, as a 
ball must expel the parts of water in order to find a passage through 
them. 

Moreover, knowing in this way the cause of the refractions which 
occur in water and glass and generally in all the other transparent bodies 
around us, we can note that the refractions occurring when the rays 
emerge from these bodies must be wholly similar to those occurring when 
they enter them. So, if the ray coming from A towards B is deflected from 
B towards I in passing from the air into a lens, the one which returns 
from I towards B must also be deflected from B towards A. Nevertheless 
other bodies may well be found (chiefly in the sky) in which refrac- 
tions result from other causes, and so are not reciprocal in this way. And 
certain cases may also be found in which the rays must be curved, though 
they merely pass through a single transparent body, just as the motion of 
a ball is often curved because it is deflected in one direction by its 
weight and in another by the action with which we have impelled it, or 
for various other reasons. For in the end, I venture to say, the three 
comparisons which I have just used are so appropriate that all the 
particular features which may be observed in them correspond to certain 
features which prove to be entirely similar in the case of light; but I have 
tried to explain only those which have the most bearing on my subject. 
And I do not wish to have you consider anything else here, except that 


104 


105 


109 


164 Optics 


the surfaces of transparent bodies which are curved deflect the rays 
passing through each of their points in the same way as would the flat 
surfaces that we can imagine touching these bodies at the same points. 
So, for example [Fig. 7], the refractions of the rays AB, AC, AD, which 


Fig. 7 


come from the flame A and fall on the curved surface of the crystal ball 
BCD, must be regarded in the same way as if AB fell on flat surface EBF, 
AC on GHC, and AD on IDK, and likewise for the others. From this you 
can see that these rays may be variously focussed or dispersed, according 
as they fall on surfaces which are differently curved. But now it is time for 
me to begin describing the structure of the eye, so as to enable you to 
understand how the rays which enter it are so disposed there as to cause 
visual perception ...! 


DISCOURSE FOUR: THE SENSES IN GENERAL 


Now I must tell you something about the nature of the senses in general, 
the more easily to explain that of sight in particular. We know for certain 
that it is the soul which has sensory perceptions, and not the body. For 
when the soul is distracted by an ecstasy or deep contemplation, we see 
that the whole body remains without sensation, even though it has 
various objects touching it. And we know that it is not, properly 
speaking, because of its presence in the parts of the body which function 
as organs of the external senses that the soul has sensory perceptions, but 
because of its presence in the brain, where it exercises the faculty called 
the ‘common’ sense.” For we observe injuries and diseases which attack 
the brain alone and impede all the senses generally, even though the rest 
of the body continues to be animated. We know, lastly, that it is through 


1 Discourse Three, on the eye, is omitted here. For an English version of this and material 
omitted below, see Descartes: Discourse on Method, Optics, Geometry and Meteor- 
ology, tr. P. J. Olscamp (Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1965). 

2 Cf. Rules, p. 41 above, and Passions, pp. 341ff below. 


Optics 165 


the nerves that the impressions formed by objects in the external parts of 
the body reach the soul in the brain. For we observe various accidents 
which cause injury only to a nerve, and destroy sensation in all the parts 
of the body to which this nerve sends its branches, without causing it to 
diminish elsewhere ...!' We must take care not to assume — as our 
philosophers commonly do — that in order to have sensory perceptions 
the soul must contemplate certain images’ transmitted by objects to the 
brain; or at any rate we must conceive the nature of these images in an 
entirely different manner from that of the philosophers. For since their 
conception of the images is confined to the requirement that they should 
resemble the objects they represent, the philosophers cannot possibly 
show us how the images can be formed by the objects, or how they can be 
received by the external sense organs and transmitted by the nerves to the 
brain. Their sole reason for positing such images was that they saw 
how easily a picture can stimulate our mind to conceive the objects 
depicted in it, and so it seemed to them that, in the same way, the 
mind must be stimulated, by little pictures formed in our head, to conceive 
the objects that affect our senses. We should, however, recall that our 
mind can be stimulated by many things other than images — by signs and 
words, for example, which in no way resemble the things they signify. 
And if, in order to depart as little as possible from accepted views, we 
prefer to maintain that the objects which we perceive by our senses really 
send images of themselves to the inside of our brain, we must at least 
observe that in no case does an image have to resemble the object it 
represents in all respects, for otherwise there would be no distinction 
between the object and its image. It is enough that the image resembles its 
object in a few respects. Indeed the perfection of an image often depends 
on its not resembling its object as much as it might. You can see this in 
the case of engravings: consisting simply of a little ink placed here and 
there on a piece of paper, they represent to us forests, towns, people, and 
even battles and storms; and although they make us think of countless 
different qualities in these objects, it is only in respect of shape that there 
is any real resemblance. And even this resemblance is very imperfect, 
since engravings represent to us bodies of varying relief and depth on a 
surface which is entirely flat. Moreover, in accordance with the rules of 
perspective they often represent circles by ovals better than by other 
circles, squares by rhombuses better than by other squares, and similarly 
for other shapes. Thus it often happens that in order to be more perfect as 


1 There follows an account of the function of the nerves and animal spirits in producing 
sensation and movement. Cf. Treatise on Man, AT x1 132ff and Passions, pp. 331-8 
below. 

2 See footnote 1, p. 154 above. 


(112) 


113 


166 Optics 


an image and to represent an object better, an engraving ought not to 
resemble it. Now we must think of the images formed in our brain in just 
the same way, and note that the problem is to know simply how they can 
enable the soul to have sensory perceptions of all the various qualities of 
the objects to which they correspond — not to know how they can 

114 resemble these objects. For instance, when our blind man touches bodies 
with his stick, they certainly do not transmit anything to him except in so 
far as they cause his stick to move in different ways according to the 
different qualities in them, thus likewise setting in motion the nerves in 
his hand, and then the regions of his brain where these nerves originate. 
This is what occasions his soul to have sensory perception of just as many 
different qualities in these bodies as there are differences in the move- 
ments caused by them in his brain. 


DISCOURSE FIVE: THE IMAGES WHICH ARE FORMED ON THE 
BACK OF THE EYE 


You see, then, that in order to have sensory perceptions the soul does not 
need to contemplate any images resembling the things which it perceives. 
And yet, for all that, the objects we look at do imprint quite perfect 
images of themselves on the back of our eyes. This has been very 
ingeniously explained by the following comparison. Suppose a chamber 
is all shut up apart from a single hole, and a glass lens is placed in front of 
this hole with a white sheet stretched at a certain distance behind it so 
that the light coming from objects outside forms images on the sheet. 

115 Nowit is said that the room represents the eye; the hole, the pupil; the 
lens, the crystalline humour, or rather all the parts of the eye which cause 
some refraction; and the sheet, the internal membrane, which is com- 
posed of the optic nerve-endings. 

But you may become more certain of this if, taking the eye of a newly 
dead person (or failing that, the eye of an ox or some other large animal), 
you carefully cut away the three surrounding membranes at the back so 
as to expose a large part of the humour without spilling any. Then cover 
the hole with some white body thin enough to let light pass through (e.g. 
a piece of paper or an egg-shell), and put this eye in the hole of a specially 
made shutter so that its front faces a place where there are various objects 
lit up by the sun, and its back faces the inside of the room where you are 
standing. (No light must enter the room except what comes through this 
eye, all of whose parts you know to be entirely transparent.) Having done 
this, if you look at the white body you will see there, not perhaps without 
wonder and pleasure, a picture representing in natural perspective all the 

116 objects outside — at any rate you will if you ensure that the eye keeps its 


Optics 167 


natural shape, according to the distance of the objects (for if you squeeze 
it just a little more or less than you ought, the picture becomes less 
distinct) ...! 

Now, when you have seen this picture in the eye of a dead animal, and 
considered its causes, you cannot doubt that a quite similar picture is 
formed in the eye of a living person, on the internal membrane for which 
we substituted the white body — indeed, a much better one is formed 
there since the humours in this eye are full of animal spirits and so are 
more transparent and more exactly of the shape necessary for this to 
occur. (And also, perhaps in the eye of an ox the shape of the pupil, 
which is not round, prevents the picture from being so perfect.) ... 

The images of objects are not only formed in this way at the back of 
the eye but also pass beyond into the brain. . .? 


DISCOURSE SIX: VISION 


Now, when this picture thus passes to the inside of our head, it still bears 
some resemblance to the objects from which it proceeds. As I have amply 
shown already, however, we must not think that it is by means of this 
resemblance that the picture causes our sensory perception of these 
objects — as if there were yet other eyes within our brain with which we 
could perceive it. Instead we must hold that it is the movements 
composing this picture which, acting directly upon our soul in so far as it 
is united to our body, are ordained by nature to make it have such 
sensations. I will explain this in more detail. All the qualities which we 
perceive in the objects of sight can be reduced to six principal ones: light, 
colour, position, distance, size and shape. First, regarding light and 
colour (the only qualities belonging properly to the sense of sight), we 
must suppose our soul to be of such a nature that what makes it have the 
sensation of light is the force of the movements taking place in the 
regions of the brain where the optic nerve-fibres originate, and what 
makes it have the sensation of colour is the manner of these movements. 
Likewise, the movements in the nerves leading to the ears make the soul 
hear sounds; those in the nerves of the tongue make it taste flavours; and, 
in general, movements in the nerves anywhere in the body make the soul 
have a tickling sensation if they are moderate, and a pain when they are 
too violent. But in all this there need be no resemblance between the ideas 
which the soul conceives and the movements which cause these ideas. 
You will readily grant this if you note that people struck in the eye seem to 
see countless sparks and flashes before them, even though they shut their 


1 A diagram is omitted here and the text abridged. 
2 Here Descartes repeats the account given in the Treatise on Man, pp. 105f above. 


117 


(124) 


(128) 


130 


131 


132 


(133) 


134 


168 Optics 


eyes or are in a very dark place; hence this sensation can be ascribed only 
to the force of the blow, which sets the optic nerve-fibres in motion as a 
bright light would do. The same force might make us hear a sound if it 
affected the ears, or feel pain if it affected some other part of the body. 
This is also confirmed by the fact that whenever you force your eyes to 
look at the sun, or at some other very bright light, they retain its 
impression for a short time afterwards, so that even with your eyes shut 
you seem to see various colours which change and pass from one to 
another as they fade away. This can only result from the fact that the 
optic nerve-fibres have been set in motion with extraordinary force, and 
cannot come to rest as soon as they usually can. But the agitation 
remaining in them when the eyes are shut is not great enough to represent 
the bright light that caused it, and thus it represents the less vivid colours. 
That these colours change as they fade away shows that their nature 
consists simply in the diversity of the movement, exactly as I have already 
suggested. And finally this is evidenced by the frequent appearance of 
colours in transparent bodies, for it is certain that nothing can cause this 
except the various ways in which the light-rays are received there. One 
example is the appearance of a rainbow in the clouds, and a still clearer 
example is the likeness of a rainbow seen in a piece of glass cut on many 
sides. 

But we must consider in detail what determines the quantity of the 
light which is seen, i.e. the quantity of the force with which each of the 
optic nerve-fibres is moved. For it is not always equal to the light which is 
in the objects, but varies in proportion to their distance and the size of the 
pupil, and also in proportion to the area at the back of the eye which may 
be occupied by the rays coming from each point of the object ... We 
must also consider that we cannot discriminate the parts of the bodies we 
are looking at except in so far as they differ somehow in colour; and 
distinct vision of these colours depends not only on the fact that all the 
rays coming from each point of the object converge in almost as many 
different points at the back of the eye, and on the fact that no rays reach 
the same points from elsewhere . . . but also on the great number of optic 
nerve-fibres in the area which the image occupies at the back of the eye. 
For example, if an object is composed of ten thousand parts capable of 
sending rays to a certain area at the back of the eye in ten thousand 
different ways, and consequently of making ten thousand colours 
simultaneously visible, these parts nonetheless will enable the soul to 
discriminate only at most a thousand colours, if we suppose that in this 
area there are only a thousand fibres of the optic nerve. Thus ten parts of 
the object, acting together upon each of the fibres, can move it in just one 
single way made up of all the ways in which they act, so that the area 


Optics 169 


occupied by each fibre has to be regarded as if it were only a single 
point. This is why a field decked out in countless different colours often 
appears from a distance to be all white or all blue; why, in general, all 
bodies are seen less distinctly from a distance than close at hand; and 
finally why the greater the area which we can make the image of a single 
object occupy at the back of the eye, the more distinctly it can be seen. 
We shall need to take special note of this fact later on. 

As regards position, i.e. the orientation of each part of an object 
relative to our body, we perceive it by means of our eyes exactly as we do 
by means of our hands. Our knowledge of it does not depend on any 
image, nor on any action coming from the object, but solely on the 
position of the tiny parts of the brain where the nerves originate. 
For this position changes ever so slightly each time there is a change 
in the position of the limbs in which the nerves are embedded. Thus it 
is ordained by nature to enable the soul not only to know the place 
occupied by each part of the body it animates relative to all the others, 
but also to shift attention from these places to any of those lying 
on the straight lines which we can imagine to be drawn from the 
extremity of each part and extended to infinity. In the same way, when 
the blind man, of whom we have already spoken so much, turns his hand 
A towards E [Fig. 8], or again his hand C towards E, the nerves 


embedded in that hand cause a certain change in his brain, and through 
this change his soul can know not only the place A or C but also all the 
other places located on the straight line AE or CE; in this way his soul 
can turn its attention to the objects B and D, and determine the places 
they occupy without in any way knowing or thinking of those which his 
hands occupy. Similarly, when our eye or head is turned in some 
direction, our soul is informed of this by the change in the brain which is 
caused by the nerves embedded in the muscles used for these movements. 
... You must not, therefore, find it strange that objects can be seen in 


135 


their true position even though the picture they imprint upon the eye is 136 


137 


138 


170 Optics 


inverted. This is just like our blind man’s being able to feel, at one and the 
same time, the object B (to his right) by means of his left hand, and the 
object D (to his left) by means of his right hand. And as the blind man 
does not judge a body to be double although he touches it with his two 
hands, so too, when both our eyes are disposed in the manner required to 
direct our attention to one and the same place, they need only make us 
see a single object there, even though a picture of it is formed in each of 
our eyes. 

The seeing of distance depends no more than does the seeing of 
position upon any images emitted from objects. Instead it depends in the 
first place on the shape of the body of the eye. For as we have said, for us 
to see things close to our eyes this shape must be slightly different from 
the shape which enables us to see things farther away; and as we adjust 
the shape of the eye according to the distance of objects, we change a 
certain part of our brain in a manner that is ordained by nature to make 
our soul perceive this distance. Ordinarily this happens without our 
reflecting upon it — just as, for example, when we clasp some body with 
our hand, we adjust our hand to its size and shape and thus feel it by 
means of our hand without needing to think of these movements. In the 
second place, we know distance by the relation of the eyes to one 
another. Our blind man holding the two sticks AE and CE (whose length 
I assume he does not know) and knowing only the distance between his 
two hands A and C and the size of the angles ACE and CAE, can tell from 
this knowledge, as if by a natural geometry, where the point E is. And 
similarly, when our two eyes A and B are turned towards point X, the 
length of the line AB and the size of the two angles XAB and XBA enable 
us to know where the point X is. We can do the same thing also with the 
aid of only one eye, by changing its position.' Thus, if we keep it turned 
towards X and place it first at point A and immediately afterwards at 
point B, this will be enough to make our imagination contain the 
magnitude of the line AC together with that of the two angles XAB and 
XBA, and thus enable us to perceive the distance from point X. And this 
is done by a mental act which, though only a very simple act of the 
imagination, involves a kind of reasoning quite similar to that used by 
surveyors when they measure inaccessible places by means of two 
different vantage points. We have yet another way of perceiving distance, 
namely by the distinctness or indistinctness of the shape seen, together 
with the strength or weakness of the light. Thus, if we gaze fixedly 
towards X [Fig. 9], the rays coming from objects 10 and 12 do not 
converge so exactly upon R or T, at the back of our eye, as they would if 


1 A diagram is omitted here. 


°9e 


seer 


om 


Fig. 9 


139 
140 


141 


172 Optics 


these objects were at points V and Y. From this we see that they are 
farther from us, or nearer to us, than X. Then, the light coming from 
object 10 to our eye is stronger than it would be if that object were near 
V, and from this we judge it to be nearer; and the light coming from 
object 12 is weaker than it would be if it were near Y, and so we judge it 
to be farther away. Finally, we may already have from another source an 
image of an object’s size, or its position, or the distinctness of its shape 
and its colours, or merely the strength of the light coming from it; and 
this may enable us to imagine its distance, if not actually to see it. For 
example, when we observe from afar some body we are used to seeing 
close at hand, we judge its distance much better than we would if its size 
were less well known to us. If we are looking at a mountain lit up by 
sunlight beyond a forest covered in shadow, it is solely the position of the 
forest that makes us judge it the nearer. And when we look at two ships 
Out at sea, one smaller than the other but proportionately nearer so that 
they appear equal in size, we can use the difference in their shapes and 
colours, and in the light they send to us, to judge which is the more 
distant. 

Concerning the manner in which we see the size and shape of objects, I 
need not say anything in particular since it is wholly included in the way 
we see the distance and the position of their parts. That is, we judge their 
size by the knowledge or opinion that we have of their distance, 
compared with the size of the images they imprint on the back of the eye 
— and not simply by the size of these images. This is sufficiently obvious 
from the fact that the images imprinted by objects very close to us are a 
hundred times bigger than those imprinted by objects ten times farther 
away, and yet they do not make us see the objects a hundred times larger; 
instead they make the objects look almost the same size, at least if their 
distance does not deceive us. It is obvious too that we judge shape by the 
knowledge or opinion that we have of the position of the various parts of 
an object, and not by the resemblance of the pictures in our eyes. For 
these pictures usually contain only ovals and rhombuses when they make 
us see circles and squares. 

But in order that you may have no doubts at all that vision works as I 
have explained it, I would again have you consider the reasons why it 
sometimes deceives us. First, it is the soul which sees, and not the eye; 
and it does not see directly, but only by means of the brain. That is why 
madmen and those who are asleep often see, or think they see, various 
objects which are nevertheless not before their eyes: namely, certain 
vapours disturb their brain and arrange those of its parts normally 
engaged in vision exactly as they would be if these objects were present. 
Then, because the impressions which come from outside pass to the 


Optics 173 


‘common’ sense by way of the nerves, if the position of these nerves is 
changed by any unusual cause, this may make us see objects in places 
other than where they are ... Again, because we normally judge that the 
impressions which stimulate our sight come from places towards which 
we have to look in order to sense them, we may easily be deceived when 
they happen to come from elsewhere. Thus, those whose eyes are affected 
by jaundice, or who are looking through yellow glass or shut up in a 
room where no light enters except through such glass, attribute this 
colour to all the bodies they look at. And the person inside the dark room 
which I described earlier attributes to the white body the colours of the 
objects outside because he directs his sight solely upon that body. And if 
our eyes see objects through lenses and in mirrors, they judge them to be 
at points where they are not and to be smaller or larger than they are, or 
inverted as well as smaller (namely, when they are somewhat distant 
from the eyes). This occurs because the lenses and mirrors deflect the rays 
coming from the objects, so that our eyes cannot see the objects distinctly 
except by making the adjustments necessary for looking towards the 
points in question.' This will readily be known by those who take the 
trouble to examine the matter. In the same way they will see how far the 
ancients went wrong in their catoptrics when they tried to determine the 
location of the images in concave and convex mirrors. It must also be 
noted that all our methods for recognizing distance are highly unreliable. 
For the shape of the eye undergoes hardly any perceptible variation when 
the object is more than four or five feet away, and even when the object is 
nearer the shape varies so little that no very precise knowledge can be 
obtained from it. And if one is looking at an object at all far away, there 
is also hardly any variation in the angles between the line joining the two 
eyes (or two positions of the same eye) and the lines from the eyes to the 
object. As a consequence, even our ‘common’ sense seems incapable of 
receiving in itself the idea of a distance greater than approximately one or 
two hundred feet. This can be verified in the case of the moon and the 
sun. Although they are among the most distant bodies that we can see, 
and their diameters are to their distances roughly as one to a hundred, 
they normally appear to us as at most only one or two feet in diameter — 
although we know very well by reason that they are extremely large and 
extremely far away. This does not happen because we cannot conceive 
them as any larger, seeing that we easily conceive towers and mountains 
which are much larger. It happens, rather, because we cannot conceive 
them as more than one or two hundred feet away, and consequently their 
diameters cannot appear to us to be more than one or two feet. The 


1 A diagram is omitted here, and the text is slightly condensed. 


(142) 


143 


144 


145 


146 


174 Optics 


position of these bodies also helps to mislead us. For usually, when they 
are very high in the sky at midday, they seem smaller than they do when 
they are rising or setting, and we can notice their distance more easily 
because there are various objects between them and our eyes. And, by 
measuring them with their instruments, the astronomers prove clearly 
that they appear larger at one time than at another not because they are 
seen to subtend a greater angle, but because they are judged to be farther 
away. It follows that the axiom of the ancient optics — which says that the 
apparent size of objects is proportional to the size of the angle of vision — 
is not always true. We are also deceived because white or luminous 
bodies, and generally all those which have a great power to stimulate the 
sense of sight, always appear just a little nearer and larger than they 
would if they had less such power. The reason why such bodies appear 
nearer is that the movement with which the pupil contracts to avoid their 
strong light is so connected with the movement which disposes the whole 
eye to see near objects distinctly — a movement by which we judge the 
distance of such objects — that the one hardly ever takes place without the 
other occurring to some extent as well. (In the same way, we cannot fully 
close the first two fingers of our hand without the third bending a little 
too, as if to close with the others.) The reason why these white or 
luminous bodies appear larger is not only that our estimation of their size 
depends on that of their distance, but also that they impress larger images 
on the back of the eye. For it must be noted that the back of the eye is 
covered by the ends of optic nerve-fibres which, though very small, still 
have some size. Thus each of them may be affected in one of its parts by 
one object and in other parts by other objects. But it is capable of being 
moved in only a single way at any given time; so when the smallest of its 
parts is affected by some very brilliant object, and the others by different 
objects that are less brilliant, the whole of it moves in accordance with 
the most brilliant object, presenting its image but not that of the others. 
Thus, suppose the ends of these little fibres are 1, 2, 3 [Fig. 10] and the 
rays which come, for example, from a star to trace an image on the back 
of the eye are spread over 1, and also slightly beyond over the six 
nerve-endings marked 2 (which I suppose are reached by no other rays 


Optics 175 


except very weak ones from regions of the sky next to the star). In this 
case the image of the star will be spread over the whole area occupied by 
the six nerve-endings marked 2 and may even spread throughout that 
occupied by the twelve marked 3 if the disturbance is strong enough to be 
propagated to them as well. So you can see that the stars, while appearing 
rather small, nevertheless appear much larger than their extreme distance 
should cause them to appear. And even if they were not perfectly round, 
they could not fail to appear so — just as a square tower seen from afar 
looks round, and all bodies that trace only very small images in the eye 
cannot trace there the shapes of their angles. Finally, as regards judge- 
ment of distance by size, shape, colour, or light, pictures drawn in 
perspective show how easy it is to make mistakes. For often the things 
depicted in such pictures appear to us to be farther off than they are 
because they are smaller, while their outlines are more blurred, and their 
colours darker or fainter, than we imagine they ought to be.! 


1 The contents of the rest of the Optics, and of the Meteorology and the Geometry, are as 
follows: 
Optics 
Discourse Seven: The means of perfecting vision 
Discourse Eight: The shapes that the transparent bodies must have in order to deflect 
rays through refraction in all the ways which are useful to vision 
Discourse Nine: The description of telescopes 
Discourse Ten: The method of cutting lenses 


Meteorology 
Discourse 1: The nature of terrestrial bodies 
Discourse 2: Vapours and exhalations 
Discourse 3: Salt 
Discourse 4: Winds 
Discourse 5: Clouds 
Discourse 6: Snow, rain and hail 
Discourse 7: Storms, lightning and all the other fires that blaze in the air 
Discourse 8: The rainbow 
Discourse 9: The colours of clouds and the circles or coronas that we sometimes 


see around the heavenly bodies 
Discourse 10: |The appearance of many suns 


Geometry 
Book 1: Problems that can be solved by constructions using only circles and 
straight lines 
Book 2: The nature of curved lines 


Book 3: Problems requiring the construction of solids and supersolids 


147 


Principles of Philosophy 


Translator’s preface 


As early as 1640 Descartes had begun to work on a presentation of his 
philosophical system ‘in an order which will make it easy to teach’ (letter 
to Mersenne of 31 December). What he planned was a comprehensive 
university textbook which would rival and, he hoped, eventually replace 
the traditional texts based on Aristotle. He particularly wanted to 
include, though in a more circumspect form, material from his suppressed 
treatise, The World. ‘My World’, he wrote to Constantijn Huygens on 
31 January 1642, ‘would be out already were it not that first of all I want 
to teach it to speak Latin. I shall call it the Summa Philosophiae, to help it 
gain a better reception among the Schoolmen, who are now persecuting it 
and trying to smother it at birth.’ 

The title which Descartes eventually adopted was Principia Philo- 
sophiae, and the Latin text was first published by Elzevir of Amsterdam 
in 1644. The work runs to four parts, each divided into a large number of 
short sections or ‘articles’ (there are five hundred and four in all). Part 
One expounds Descartes’ metaphysical doctrines (though they are pre- 
sented in a very different fashion from that of the Meditations); Part Two 
gives a full account of the principles of Cartesian physics; Part Three 
gives a detailed explanation, in accordance with those principles, of the 
nature of the universe; and Part Four deals similarly with the origins of 
the earth and a wide variety of terrestrial phenomena. A further two 
parts were originally planned, to deal with plants and animals, and man, 
but these were never completed (see below, Part Four, article 188). 

A French version of the Principles, by the Abbé Claude Picot (c. 
1601-68), was published by Le Gras of Paris in 1647; Descartes gave the 
translation his enthusiastic approval (see his prefatory letter, below p. 
179). The French text diverges considerably from the original Latin, and 
some (though certainly not all) of these departures were probably 
authorized by Descartes; the modern translator therefore has to decide 
what to do when the two versions differ. One strategy, adopted by 
Haldane and Ross,! is to provide a translation ‘made from the Latin 
version collated with the French’, but the result is an uneasy amalgam 
which often leaves it unclear whether a given passage represents 


1 See General Introduction, above p. viii. 


177 


178 Principles of Philosophy 


Descartes’ original text of 1644. To avoid this drawback, the present 
version always provides, in the first instance, a direct rendering of Des- 
cartes’ original Latin. A translation of the French version has, however, 
also been included in cases where the French illuminates, or provides a 
useful supplement to, the Latin; but such material from the French ver- 
sion is always placed within diamond brackets <>, or relegated to 
footnotes, to indicate that it is not to be found in Descartes’ original text. 

The decision about how often to append a rendering of the French is 
made easier by the fact that the departures from the Latin turn out, on 
careful scrutiny, to fall into two distinct categories. (1) Often Picot will 
loosely paraphrase the text, sometimes virtually rewriting the original in 
an attempt to illuminate Descartes’ meaning. In most cases there seems 
no good reason to render these interpretative paraphrases, since they 
seldom improve on the splendid clarity and precision of Descartes’ Latin, 
and sometimes introduce needless complications of their own (in Part 
One, article 24, for example, the French version inserts a gratuitous 
reference to innate notions which makes the subsequent train of thought 
incomprehensible). (2) Quite apart from paraphrases and reinterpreta- 
tions of the original, we find, especially in Parts Two to Four, a good deal 
of completely new material, often of considerable interest, which has no 
counterpart at all in the Latin. This can vary from a brief supplementary 
comment illustrating some point (e.g. Part Three, article 29) to an 
extended discussion which can sometimes double the original length of 
an article (e.g. Part Four, article 203). Much of this new material seems 
too valuable to omit; moreover, there is evidence that some of the 
additions were authorized by Descartes or even directly added by him 
when he looked at Picot’s version (thus, Frans Burman, who questioned 
Descartes about the laws of impact in Part Two, reports him as 
remarking that ‘since many were complaining of the obscurity of these 
laws, he supplied a little clarification and further explanation in the 
French edition of the Principles’'). 

The Principles of Philosophy is a very long work, and it has been 
necessary to abridge it for the present edition. The translation that 
follows, which is based on the texts in Volumes vii A (Latin) and 1x B 
(French) of Adam and Tannery,” includes all the material that is philo- 
sophical in the modern sense, as well as substantial portions of what 
would nowadays be called ‘scientific’ material, particularly where this 
throws light on Descartes’ general conception of science. Part One is 
translated in its entirety; in Parts Two, Three and Four, selected articles 
are translated; the titles alone are supplied for the remaining articles. 

J.C. 


1 AT v 168; for further evidence see AT 1x B, Avertissement. 
2 See General Introduction, above, p. x. 


[Preface to the French edition] 


Author’s letter to the translator of the book which may here 
serve as a preface! 


Sir,” 

The version of my Principles which you have taken the trouble to make 
is so polished and so thorough as to make me hope that the work will be 
more widely read in French than in Latin, and better understood. My 
only concern is that the title may put off those many people who have not 
had an education based on letters or who have a low opinion of 
philosophy because the philosophy they have been taught has not 
satisfied them. This makes me think that it would be a good idea to add a 
preface explaining the subject of the book, my purpose in writing it, and 
the benefit which may be derived from it. But although it would seem to 
be up to me to produce this preface because I ought to know these things 
better than anyone else, all I can persuade myself to do here is to 
summarize the principal points which I think such a preface should deal 
with. I leave it to your discretion to pass on to the public as many of them 
as you consider to be pertinent. 

First of all, I would have wished to explain what philosophy is, 
beginning with the most commonplace points. For example, the word 
‘philosophy’ means the study of wisdom, and by ‘wisdom’ is meant not 
only prudence in our everyday affairs but also a perfect knowledge of all 
things that mankind is capable of knowing, both for the conduct of life 
and for the preservation of health and the discovery of all manner of 
skills. In order for this kind of knowledge to be perfect it must be 
deduced from first causes; thus, in order to set about acquiring it — and it 
is this activity to which the term ‘to philosophize’ strictly refers — we 
must start with the search for first causes or principles. These principles 
must satisfy two conditions. First, they must be so clear and so evident 
that the human mind cannot doubt their truth when it attentively 
concentrates on them; and, secondly, the knowledge of other things must 
depend on them, in the sense that the principles must be capable of being 


_ 


This preface first appeared in the 1647 French edition. The original Latin text of 1644 
contains no preface apart from the short dedicatory letter to Elizabeth translated below, 


pp. 190-2. 
2 The addressee is the Abbé Picot; see Translator’s preface, above p. 177. 


179 


AT IXB 


I 


180 Principles of Philosophy 


known without knowledge of these other matters, but not vice versa. 
Next, in deducing from these principles the knowledge of things which 
depend on them, we must try to ensure that everything in the entire chain 
of deductions which we draw is very manifest. In truth it is only God who 
is perfectly wise, that is to say, who possesses complete knowledge of the 
truth of all things; but men can be said to possess more or less wisdom 
depending on how much knowledge they possess of the most important 
truths. I think that everything I have just said would be accepted by all 
people of learning. 

Next, I would have looked at the benefits of this philosophy and 
shown that it encompasses everything which the human mind is capable 
of knowing. Thus we should consider that it is this philosophy alone 
which distinguishes us from the most savage and barbarous peoples, and 
that a nation’s civilization and refinement depends on the superiority of 
the philosophy which is practised there. Hence the greatest good that a 
state can enjoy is to possess true philosophers. As for the individual, it is 
not only beneficial to live with those who apply themselves to this study; 
it is incomparably better to undertake it oneself. For by the same token 
it is undoubtedly much better to use one’s own eyes to get about, and also 
to enjoy the beauty of colours and light, than to close one’s eyes and be 
led around by someone else. Yet even the latter is much better than 
keeping one’s eyes closed and having no guide but oneself. Living 
without philosophizing is exactly like having one’s eyes closed without 
ever trying to open them; and the pleasure of seeing everything which our 
sight reveals is in no way comparable to the satisfaction accorded by 
knowledge of the things which philosophy enables us to discover. Lastly, 
the study of philosophy is more necessary for the regulation of our 
morals and our conduct in this life than is the use of our eyes to guide our 
steps. The brute beasts, who have only their bodies to preserve, are 
continually occupied in looking for food to nourish them; but human 
beings, whose most important part is the mind, should devote their main 
efforts to the search for wisdom, which is the true food of the mind. And | 
am sure that there are many people who would not fail to make the 
search if they had some hope of success and knew how much they were 
capable of. No soul, however base, is so strongly attached to the objects 
of the senses that it does not sometimes turn aside and desire some other, 
greater good, even though it may often not know what this good consists 
in. Those who are most favoured by fortune and possess health, honour 
and riches in abundance are no more exempt from this desire than 
anyone else. On the contrary, I am convinced that it is just such people 
who long most ardently for another good — a higher good than all those 
that they already possess. Now this supreme good, considered by natural 


Preface to the French edition 181 


reason without the light of faith, is nothing other than the knowledge of 
the truth through its first causes, that is to say wisdom, of which 
philosophy is the study. Since all these points are absolutely true, they 
would easily carry conviction if they were properly argued. 

What prevents these points being accepted is the widespread experi- 
ence that those who profess to be philosophers are often less wise and less 
reasonable than those who have never applied themselves to philosophy. 
And so at this point I would have explained briefly what all the 5 
knowledge which we now possess consists in and the levels of wisdom 
that have so far been attained. The first level contains only notions which 
are so clear in themselves that they can be acquired without meditation. 
The second comprises everything we are acquainted with through 
sensory experience. The third comprises what we learn by conversing 
with other people. And one may add a fourth category, namely what is 
learned by reading books — not all books, but those which have been 
written by people who are capable of instructing us well; for in such cases 
we hold a kind of conversation with the authors. I think that all the 
wisdom which is generally possessed is acquired in these four ways. I am 
not including divine revelation in the list, because it does not lead us on 
by degrees but raises us at a stroke to infallible faith. Now in all ages 
there have been great men who have tried to find a fifth way of reaching 
wisdom — a way which is incomparably more elevated and more sure 
than the other four. This consists in the search for the first causes and the 
true principles which enable us to deduce the reasons for everything we 
are capable of knowing; and it is above all those who have laboured to 
this end who have been called philosophers. I am not sure, however, that 
there has been anyone up till now who has succeeded in this project. The 
first and most important of those whose writings have come down to us 
are Plato and Aristotle. The only difference between these two is that the 
former, following the footsteps of his master Socrates, ingenuously 
confessed that he had never yet been able to discover anything certain. 6 
He was content instead to write what seemed to him to be probable, and 
accordingly he used his imagination to devise various principles by means 
of which he tried to account for other things. Aristotle, by contrast, was 
less candid. Although he had been Plato’s disciple for twenty years, and 
possessed no principles apart from those of Plato, he completely changed 
the method of stating them and put them forward as true and certain, 
though it seems most unlikely that he in fact considered them to be so. 
Now these two men had a great deal of intelligence and much wisdom of 
the kind that is acquired in the four ways mentioned above, and this gave 
them such great authority that those who came after them were content 
to follow their opinions rather than look for something better. The main 


182 Principles of Philosophy 


dispute among their disciples was about whether everything should be 
called into doubt or whether there were some things which were certain — 
a dispute which led both sides into extravagant errors. Some of those 
who were in favour of doubt extended it even to the actions of life, so 
that they neglected to employ common prudence in their behaviour; 
while those who took the side of certainty supposed that it had to depend 
on the senses and trusted them entirely, to the point where Epicurus, it is 
said, was rash enough to affirm, against all the arguments of the 
astronomers, that the sun is no larger than it appears. A fault which may 
be observed in the majority of disputes is that since the truth lies 
midway between two positions which are being maintained, the 
disputants on each side move further and further away from it as 
their desire to contradict the opposing view increases. But the error of 
those who leaned too far towards the side of doubt was not followed for 
very long, while the opposing error has to some extent been corrected by 
the recognition that the senses deceive us in many cases. Nevertheless, | 
am not sure that anyone has yet expunged the second error completely by 
explaining the following point: on the one hand, certainty does not lie in 
the senses but solely in the understanding, when it possesses evident 
perceptions; on the other hand, so long as we possess only the kind of 
knowledge that is acquired by the first four degrees of wisdom we should 
not doubt the probable truths which concern the conduct of life, while at 
the same time we should not consider them to be so certain that we are 
incapable of changing our views when we are obliged to do so by some 
evident reason. Because of failure to recognize this truth, or to make use 
of it in the case of those few who have recognized it, the majority of those 
aspiring to be philosophers in the last few centuries have blindly followed 
Aristotle. Indeed they have often corrupted the sense of his writings and 
attributed to him various opinions which he would not recognize to be 
his, were he now to return to this world. Those who have not followed 
Aristotle (and this group includes many of the best minds) have 
nevertheless been saturated with his opinions in their youth (since these 
are the only opinions taught in the Schools) and this has so dominated 
their outlook that they have been unable to arrive at knowledge of true 
principles. Although I respect all these thinkers and would not wish to 
make myself disliked by criticizing them, I can give a proof of what I say 
which I do not think any of them will reject, namely that they have all put 
forward as principles things of which they did not possess perfect 
knowledge. For example, there is not one of them, so far as I know, who 
has not supposed there to be weight in terrestrial bodies. Yet although 
experience shows us very clearly that the bodies we call ‘heavy’ descend 
towards the centre of the earth, we do not for all that have any 


Preface to the French edition 183 


knowledge of the nature of what is called ‘gravity’, that is to say, the 
cause or principle which makes bodies descend in this way,! and we must 
derive such knowledge from some other source. The same can be said of 
the void and of atoms and of heat and cold, dryness and humidity, salt, 
sulphur, mercury and all other similar things which some people have 
proposed as their first principles. Now none of the conclusions deduced 
from a principle which is not evident can themselves be evident, even 
though they may be deduced from the principle in an evident manner. It 
follows that none of the arguments based on such principles have been 
able to provide their proponents with certain knowledge of anything, and 
accordingly such arguments have not been able to bring them one step 
further in their search for wisdom. If they have discovered anything true, 
it has been solely by means of one of the four methods set out above. 
Nevertheless, I do not wish to detract in any way from the reputation 
which any of these philosophers may claim. I am simply obliged to point 
out, for the consolation of those who have never studied, the following 
similarity with what happens when we travel: so long as we turn our 
back on the place we wish to get to, then the longer and faster we walk 
the further we get from our destination, so that even if we are 
subsequently set on the right road we cannot reach our goal as quickly as 
we would have done had we never walked in the wrong direction. The 
same thing happens if we have bad principles. The more we develop them 
and the more carefully we work at deducing various consequences from 
them in our belief that we are philosophizing well, the further we move 
from knowledge of the truth and from wisdom. The conclusion that must 
be drawn from this is that among those who have studied whatever has 
been called philosophy up till now, those who have learnt the least are 
the most capable of learning true philosophy. 

After fully explaining these matters, I would have wanted next to put 
down the reasons which serve to prove that the true principles, enabling 
one to reach the highest degree of wisdom which constitutes the supreme 
good of human life, are the principles which I have set down in this book. 
Just two reasons are enough to prove the point: the first is that the 
principles are very clear, and the second is that they enable all other 
things to be deduced from them. These are the only two conditions that 
such principles must meet. Now I can easily prove that the principles are 
very clear. This is shown by the way in which I discovered them, namely 
by rejecting everything in which I could discover the least occasion for 
doubt; for it is certain that principles which it was impossible to reject in 
this way, when one attentively considered them, are the clearest and most 
evident that the human mind can know. Thus I considered that someone 

1 See footnote 1, p. 234 below. 


IO 


Il 


184 Principles of Philosophy 


who wishes to doubt everything cannot, for all that, doubt that he exists 
while he is doubting; and that what reasons in this way, being unable to 
doubt itself while doubting everything else, is not what we call our body 
but what we call our soul or our thought. Accordingly I took the being or 
existence of this thought as my first principle, and from it I deduced very 
clearly the following principles. There is a God who is the author of 
everything there is in the world; further, since he is the source of all 
truth, he certainly did not create in us an understanding of the kind 
which would be capable of making a mistake in its judgements concern- 
ing the things of which it possesses a very clear and very distinct 
perception. These are all the principles that I make use of with regard to 
immaterial or metaphysical things, and from them I deduce very clearly 
the principles of corporeal or physical things, namely that there are 
bodies which are extended in length, breadth and depth, and which have 
various shapes and move in various ways. Here, in total, are all the 
principles which I use to deduce the truth of other things. The other 
reason which proves the clarity of these principles is that they have been 
known for all time and indeed accepted as true and indubitable by 
everyone, with the sole exception of the existence of God, which some 
people have called into doubt because they have attributed too much to 
sensory perceptions, and God cannot be seen or touched. Yet although 
all the truths which I include among my principles have been known for 
all time by everyone, there has, so far as I know, been no one up till now 
who has recognized them as the principles of philosophy, that is to say, as 
the principles which enable us to deduce the knowledge of all the other 
things to be found in the world. This is why it remains for me here to 
prove that they do indeed qualify as principles of this sort; and I think 
that the best way of doing this is to get people to see by experience that 
this is so, that is to say, to invite my readers to read this book. Admittedly, 
I have not dealt with all things, for this would be impossible. But I think I 
have explained all the things I have had occasion to deal with in such a 
way that those who read the book attentively will be convinced that in 
order to arrive at the highest knowledge of which the human mind is 
capable there is no need to look for any principles other than those I 
have provided. This will be especially clear if, after reading what I have 
written and also perusing the writings of others, the reader takes the 
trouble to consider the number and the diversity of the topics explained 
in my book, and sees by comparison how few plausible arguments others 
have been able to produce in attempting to explain these same topics by 
means of principles which differ from mine. To enable my readers to 
undertake this survey with greater ease, I could have told them that those 
who have absorbed my opinions find it much easier to understand and 


Preface to the French edition 185 


recognize the true value of other people’s writings than those who have 
not absorbed my views. This is the exact opposite of what I said above 
about those who have started with traditional philosophy, namely that 
the more they have studied it the less fitted they generally are to acquire a 
sound grasp of true philosophy. 

I would also have added a word of advice about the way to read this 
book. I should like the reader first of all to go quickly through the whole 
book like a novel, without straining his attention too much or stopping at 12 
the difficulties which may be encountered. The aim should be merely to 
ascertain in a general way which matters I have dealt with. After this, if he 
finds that these matters deserve to be examined and he has the curiosity 
to ascertain their causes, he may read the book a second time in order to 
observe how my arguments follow. But if he is not always able to see this 
fully, or if he does not understand all the arguments, he should not give 
up at once. He should merely mark with a pen the places where he finds 
the difficulties and continue to read on to the end without a break. If he 
then takes up the book for the third time, I venture to think he will now 
find the solutions to most of the difficulties he marked before; and if any 
still remain, he will discover their solution on a final re-reading. 

An examination of the nature of many different minds has led me to 
observe that there are almost none that are so dull and slow as to be 
incapable of forming sound opinions or indeed of grasping all the most 
advanced sciences, provided they receive proper guidance. And this may 
also be proved by reason. For since the principles in question are clear, 
and nothing is permitted to be deduced from them except by very evident 
reasoning, everyone has enough intelligence to understand the things 
which depend on them. If we leave aside the problems caused by 
preconceived opinions, from which no one is entirely free (although those 
who have studied bad science the most are the greatest victims), then it 
almost always happens that people of moderate intelligence neglect to 13 
study because they do not think they are capable of it, while the others, 
who are keenest, press on too quickly, with the result that they often 
accept principles which are not evident, and draw uncertain inferences 
from them. This is why I should like to assure those who are over- 
diffident about their powers that there is nothing in my writings which 
they are not capable of completely understanding provided they take the 
trouble to examine them. I would, however, also like to warn the others 
that even the most excellent minds will need a great deal of time and 
attention in order to look at all the things which I set myself to include. 

Following on from this, in order to get people to see the purpose I had 
in publishing my work, I would wish to explain here the order which | 
think we should follow when we aim to instruct ourselves. First of all, a 


14 


>) 


186 Principles of Philosophy 


man who still possesses only the ordinary and imperfect knowledge that 
can be acquired in the four ways explained above should try before 
anything else to devise for himself a code of morals which is sufficient to 
regulate the actions of his life. For this is something which permits no 
delay, since we should endeavour above all else to live well. After that, he 
should study logic. I do not mean the logic of the Schools, for this is 
strictly speaking nothing but a dialectic which teaches ways of expound- 
ing to others what one already knows or even of holding forth without 
judgement about things one does not know. Such logic corrupts good 
sense rather than increasing it. I mean instead the kind of logic which 
teaches us to direct our reason with a view to discovering the truths of 
which we are ignorant. Since this depends to a great extent on practice, it 
is good for the student to work for a long time at practising the rules on 
very easy and simple questions like those of mathematics. Then, when he 
has acquired some skill in finding the truth on these questions, he should 
begin to tackle true philosophy in earnest. The first part of philosophy is 
metaphysics, which contains the principles of knowledge, including the 
explanation of the principal attributes of God, the non-material nature of 
our souls and all the clear and distinct notions which are in us. The 
second part is physics, where, after discovering the true principles of 
material things, we examine the general composition of the entire 
universe and then, in particular, the nature of this earth and all the bodies 
which are most commonly found upon it, such as air, water, fire, 
magnetic ore and other minerals. Next we need to examine individually 
the nature of plants, of animals and, above all, of man, so that we may 
be capable later on of discovering the other sciences which are beneficial 
to man. Thus the whole of philosophy is like a tree. The roots are 
metaphysics, the trunk is physics, and the branches emerging from the 
trunk are all the other sciences, which may be reduced to three principal 
ones, namely medicine, mechanics and morals. By ‘morals’ I understand 
the highest and most perfect moral system, which presupposes a com- 
plete knowledge of the other sciences and is the ultimate level of wisdom. 

Now just as it is not the roots or the trunk of a tree from which one 
gathers the fruit, but only the ends of the branches, so the principal 
benefit of philosophy depends on those parts of it which can only be learnt 
last of all. I am ignorant of almost all of these; but the earnest desire I 
have always had to render service to the public led me, twelve years ago, 
to publish a number of essays on subjects where it seemed to me that I 
had learnt something. The first part of these essays was a Discourse on 
the Method of rightly conducting one’s reason and seeking the truth in 
the sciences, where I summarized the principal rules of logic and of an 
imperfect moral code which we may follow provisionally while we do 


Preface to the French edition 187 


not yet know a better one. The remaining parts were three treatises: the 
Optics, the Meteorology and the Geometry. In the Optics my purpose 
was to show that one could make sufficient progress in philosophy to 
enable one to achieve knowledge of the arts which are beneficial for life; 
for the designing of telescopes, which I explained there, is one of the most 
difficult projects ever attempted.! In the Meteorology I wanted people to 
recognize the difference that exists between the philosophy I practise and 
that which is taught in the Schools, where the same subject-matter is 
normally dealt with.” Finally, in the Geometry, I aimed to demonstrate 
that I had discovered several things which had hitherto been unknown, 
and thus to promote the belief that many more things may yet be 
discovered, in order to stimulate everyone to undertake the search for 
truth. Later on, foreseeing the difficulty which many would have in 
grasping the foundations of metaphysics, I tried to explain the principal 
points in a book of Meditations. Although this work is not very large, the 
size of the volume was increased, and the contents greatly clarified, by the 
addition of the objections that several very learned persons sent me on the 
subject, and by the replies I made to them. And finally, when I thought 
that these earlier works had sufficiently prepared the minds of my readers 
to accept the Principles of Philosophy, | published these too. I divided the 
book into four parts. The first contains the principles of knowledge, i.e. 
what may be called ‘first philosophy’ or ‘metaphysics’; so in order to gain 
a sound understanding of this part it is appropriate to read first of all the 
Meditations which I wrote on the same subject. The other three parts 
contain all that is most general in physics, namely an explanation of the 
first laws or principles of nature and the manner of composition of the 
heavens, the fixed stars, the planets, the comets and, in general, the entire 
universe. Next comes a particular account of the nature of this earth and 
of air, water, fire and magnetic ore, which are the bodies that are most 
commonly found upon it, and also an account of all the qualities which 
we observe in these bodies, such as light, heat, weight and so on. In this 
way I consider myself to have embarked on an explanation of the whole 
of philosophy in an orderly way, without having omitted any of the 


1 Discourses 8 and 9 of the Optics provide detailed discussion of the optimum shape and 
configuration of telescopic lenses. 

2 ‘I regard the minute parts of terrestrial bodies as being all composed of one single kind of 
matter, and believe that each of them could be divided repeatedly in infinitely many 
ways, and that there is no more difference between them than there is between stones of 
various different shapes cut from the same rock ... But to keep the peace with the 
[scholastic] philosophers, I have no wish to deny any further items which they may 
imagine in bodies over and above what I have described, such as their “substantial 
forms’’, their ‘‘real qualities”, and so on. It simply seems to me that my arguments will be 
all the more acceptable in so far as I can make them depend on fewer things.’ 
Meteorology, Discourse 1 (AT vI 239). 


16 


17 


18 


188 Principles of Philosophy 


things which ought to precede the topics I wrote about last. But in order 
to bring the plan to its conclusion I should have to go on to explain in the 
same manner the nature of all the particular bodies which exist on the 
earth, namely minerals, plants, animals and, most importantly, man. And 
then to conclude, I should have to give an exact account of medicine, 
morals and mechanics. This is what I should have to do in order to give 
to mankind a body of philosophy that is quite complete; and I do not yet 
feel so old, or so diffident about my powers, or so far away from 
knowledge of these remaining topics, that I would not now boldly try to 
bring the plan to its conclusion, provided I had the resources to make 
all the observations! I should need in order to back up and justify my 
arguments. But this, I can see, would require great expense — too great for 
an individual like myself unless he were assisted by the public. And since | 
do not see that I can expect such assistance, I think that in future I should 
be content to study for my own private instruction and that future 
generations will forgive me if from now on I give up working on their 
behalf. 

Meanwhile, to show how I think I have already served posterity, I will 
here point out the fruits which I am sure can be derived from my 
principles. The first is the satisfaction which will be felt in using them to 
discover many truths which have been unknown up till now. For 
although the truth often does not touch our imagination as much as 
falsehood and pretence, because it seems less striking and more plain, 
nevertheless the satisfaction it produces is always more durable and more 
solid. The second benefit is that the study of these principles will 
accustom people little by little to form better judgements about all the 
things they come across, and hence will make them wiser. The effect so 
produced will be the opposite of that produced by ordinary philosophy. 
For it is easy to observe in those we call ‘pedants’ that philosophy makes 
them less capable of reasoning than they would be if they had never 
learnt it. The third benefit is that the truths contained in these principles, 
because they are very clear and very certain, will eliminate all ground for 
dispute, and so will dispose people’s minds to gentleness and harmony. 
This is the opposite result to that produced by the debates in the Schools, 
which — slowly and without their noticing it — make the participants 
more argumentative and opinionated, and hence are perhaps the major 
cause of the heresies and disagreements which now plague the world. The 
last and greatest fruit of these principles is that they will enable those 
who develop them to discover many truths which I have not explained at 
all. Thus, moving little by little from one truth to the next, they may in 
time acquire a perfect knowledge of all philosophy, and reach the highest 


1 Fr. expériences; Cf. Discourse, part 6, pp. 143ff, and footnote p. 143 above. 


Preface to the French edition 189 


level of wisdom. One sees in all the arts that although they are at first 
rough and imperfect, nevertheless, because they contain some element of 
truth, the effect of which is revealed by experience, they are gradually 
perfected by practice. So it is in philosophy: when one has true principles 
and follows them, one cannot fail to come upon other truths from time to 
time. Indeed the best way of proving the falsity of Aristotle’s principles is 
to point out that they have not enabled any progress to be made in all the 
many centuries in which they have been followed. 

I am well aware that there are some people who are so hasty and use so 
little circumspection in what they do that even with very solid founda- 
tions they cannot construct anything certain. Since such people are 
normally quicker than anyone else at producing books, they may in a 
short time wreck everything I have done. For although I have carefully 
tried to banish doubt and uncertainty from my style of philosophizing, 
they may introduce these elements into it if their writings are accepted as 
Mine, Or as containing my opinions. I recently had some experience of 
this from one of those who were reckoned to be particularly anxious to 
follow me; indeed, I had written of him somewhere that I was ‘so 
confident of his intelligence’ that I did not think he held any views that I 
would not ‘gladly have acknowledged as my own’.' Last year he 
published a book entitled The Foundations of Physics in which, as far as 
physics and medicine are concerned, it appears that everything he wrote 
was taken from my writings — both from those I have published and also 
from a still imperfect work on the nature of animals which fell into his 
hands. But because he copied down the material inaccurately and 
changed the order and denied certain truths of metaphysics on which the 
whole of physics must be based, I am obliged to disavow his work 
entirely. And I must also beg my readers never to attribute to me any 
opinion they do not find explicitly stated in my writings. Furthermore, 
they should not accept any opinion as true — whether in my writings or 
elsewhere — unless they see it to be very clearly deduced from true 
principles. 

I am also very well aware that many centuries may pass before all the 
truths that can be deduced from these principles are actually so deduced. 
For the majority of truths remaining to be discovered depend on various 
particular observations” which we never happen on by chance but which 
must be sought out with care and expense by very intelligent people. It 


1 These enthusiastic comments appeared in Descartes’ open letter to Voetius (Epistola ad 
G. Voetium) published in 1643 (AT vit B 163). The reference is to Henricus Regius 
(1598-1679), Professor of Medicine at Utrecht, whose Fundamenta physices appeared in 
1646. For details of Descartes’ relationship with Regius see Translator’s preface to 
Comments on a Certain Broadsheet, below p. 293. 

2 Fr. expériences; see footnote above p. 143. 


19 


20 


AT VIIA 


I 


190 Principles of Philosophy 


will not easily come about that the same people who have the capacity to 
make good use of these observations will have the means to make them. 
What is more, the majority of the best minds have formed such a bad 
opinion of the whole of philosophy, because of the faults they have 
noticed in the philosophy that has been current up till now, that they 
certainly will not apply themselves to look for a better one. But perhaps 
the difference which they see between these principles of mine and all 
those of other philosophers, as well as the long chain of truths that can be 
deduced from them, will finally make them realize how important it is to 
continue in the search for these truths, and to what a high level of 
wisdom, and to what perfection and felicity of life, these truths can bring 
us. If they realize this, I venture to believe that there will not be one of 
them who does not try to apply himself to such a beneficial study, or at 
least favours and willingly assists with all his resources those who devote 
themselves to it with success. My earnest wish is that our descendants 
may see the happy outcome of this project. 


[Dedicatory Letter to Elizabeth] 


To Her Serene Highness the Princess Elizabeth 
eldest daughter of Frederick, King of Bohemia, 
Count Palatine and Elector of the Holy Roman Empire 


Your Serene Highness, 

The greatest reward which I have received from the writings I have 
previously published is that you have deigned to read them; for as a result 
they have provided the occasion for my being admitted into the circle of 
your acquaintance. And my subsequent experience of your great talents 
leads me to think that it would be a service to mankind to set them down 
as an example to posterity. It would ill become me to use flattery or to 
put forward any assertion which has not been thoroughly scrutinized, 
especially in a work in which I shall be trying to lay down the 
foundations of the truth. And I know that your generous and modest 
nature will welcome the simple and unadorned judgement of a philo- 
sopher more than the polished compliments of those with smoother 
tongues. I shall therefore write only what I know to be true either from 
reason or by experience, and in this introduction I propose to philo- 
sophize just as I do throughout the rest of the book. 

There is a great difference between apparent virtues and true ones; and 
even in the case of true virtues, there is a great difference between those 
which are derived from an exact knowledge of things and those which 
are accompanied by some measure of ignorance. What I understand by 


Dedicatory Letter to Elizabeth 191 


‘apparent virtues’ are certain vices which are not very common and are 
the opposites of other better known ones; because they are farther 
removed from such vices than the virtues which occupy an intermediate 
position, they are usually more admired. Thus it is more common to find 
people who timidly flee from danger than to find people who rashly 
throw themselves into it; and so rashness is contrasted with the vice of 
timidity, as if it were a virtue, and is commonly valued more highly than 
true courage. Similarly, someone who is over-generous is often more 
highly praised than one who gives liberally; and again, no one acquires a 
great reputation for piety more easily than the superstitious or hypocri- 
tical person. 

As for the true virtues, many of them arise not solely from the 
knowledge of what is right but from some error. Thus goodness is often 
the result of simplicity, piety the result of fear, and courage the result of 
desperation. Because such virtues differ from each other, they go by 
different names. But the pure and genuine virtues, which proceed solely 
from knowledge of what is right, all have one and the same nature and 
are included under the single term ‘wisdom’. For whoever possesses the 
firm and powerful resolve always to use his reasoning powers correctly, 
as far as he can, and to carry out whatever he knows to be best, is truly 
wise, so far as his nature permits. And simply because of this, he will 
possess justice, courage, temperance, and all the other virtues; but they 
will be interlinked in such a way that no one virtue stands out among the 
others. Such virtues are far superior to those which owe their distin- 
guishing marks to some admixture of vice, but because they are less well 
known to the majority they do not normally receive such lavish praise. 

Now there are two prerequisites for the kind of wisdom just described, 
namely the perception of the intellect and the disposition of the will. But 
whereas what depends on the will is within the capacity of everyone, 
there are some people who possess far sharper intellectual vision than 
others. Those who are by nature somewhat backward intellectually 
should make a firm and faithful resolution to do their utmost to acquire 
knowledge of what is right, and always to pursue what they judge to be 
right; this should suffice to enable them, despite their ignorance on many 
points, to achieve wisdom according to their lights and thus to find great 
favour with God. Nevertheless they will be left far behind by those who 
possess not merely a very firm resolve to act rightly but also the sharpest 
intelligence combined with the utmost zeal for acquiring knowledge of 
the truth. 

That such zeal is abundantly present in Your Highness is clear from the 
fact that neither the diversions of the Court nor the customary education 
that so often condemns young ladies to ignorance has been able to 


192 Principles of Philosophy 


prevent you from studying all the worthwhile arts and sciences. And the 
outstanding and incomparable sharpness of your intelligence is obvious 
from the penetrating examination you have made of all the secrets of 
these sciences, and from the fact that you have acquired an exact 
knowledge of them in so short a time. I have even greater evidence of 
your powers — and this is special to myself — in the fact that you are the 
only person I have so far found who has completely understood all my 
previously published works. Many other people, even those of the utmost 
acumen and learning, find them very obscure; and it generally happens 
with almost everyone else that if they are accomplished in Metaphysics 
they hate Geometry, while if they have mastered Geometry they do not 
grasp what I have written on First Philosophy. Your intellect is, to my 
knowledge, unique in finding everything equally clear; and this is why my 
use of the term ‘incomparable’ is quite deserved. And when I consider 
that such a varied and complete knowledge of all things is to be found 
not in some aged pedant who has spent many years in contemplation but 
in a young princess whose beauty and youth call to mind one of the 
Graces rather than gray-eyed Minerva or any of the Muses, then I cannot 
but be lost in admiration. 

Finally, I see that all the necessary conditions for perfect and sublime 
wisdom, both on the side of knowledge and on the side of the will, shine 
forth in your character. For, together with your royal dignity, you show 
an extraordinary kindness and gentleness which, though continually 
buffeted by the blows of fortune, has never become embittered or broken. 
I am so overwhelmed by this that I consider that this statement of my 
philosophy should be offered and dedicated to the wisdom which I so 
admire in you — for philosophy is nothing else but the study of wisdom. 
And indeed my desire to be known as a philosopher is no greater than my 
desire to be known as 

Your Serene Highness’s most devoted servant, 
Descartes 


PRINCIPLES OF PHILOSOPHY 


PART ONE 
The Principles of Human Knowledge 


1. The seeker after truth must, once in the course of his life, doubt 
everything, as far as is possible. 

Since we began life as infants, and made various judgements concerning 
the things that can be perceived by the senses before we had the full use of 
our reason, there are many preconceived opinions that keep us from 
knowledge of the truth.!' It seems that the only way of freeing ourselves 
from these opinions is to make the effort, once in the course of our life, to 
doubt everything which we find to contain even the smallest suspicion of 
uncertainty. 


2. What is doubtful should even be considered as false. 

Indeed, it will even prove useful, once we have doubted these things, to 
consider them as false, so that our discovery of what is most certain and 
easy to know may be all the clearer. 


3. This doubt should not meanwhile be applied to ordinary life. 

This doubt, while it continues, should be kept in check and employed 
solely in connection with the contemplation of the truth. As far as 
ordinary life is concerned, the chance for action would frequently pass us 
by if we waited until we could free ourselves from our doubts, and so we 
are often compelled to accept what is merely probable. From time to time 
we may even have to make a choice between two alternatives, even 
though it is not apparent that one of the two is more probable than the 
other. 


4. The reasons for doubt concerning the things that can be perceived by 
the senses. 

Given, then, that our efforts are directed solely to the search for truth, 

our initial doubts will be about the existence of the objects of sense- 


1 Some examples of such preconceived opinions are given in art. 71, pp. 218f below. 


193 


AT VIIA 
5 


194 Principles of Philosophy 


perception and imagination. The first reason for such doubts is that from 
time to time we have caught out the senses when they were in error, and 
it is prudent never to place too much trust in those who have deceived us 
even once. The second reason is that in our sleep we regularly seem to 
have sensory perception of, or to imagine, countless things which do not 
exist anywhere; and if our doubts are on the scale just outlined, there 
seem to be no marks by means of which we can with certainty distinguish 
being asleep from being awake. 


5. The reasons for doubting even mathematical demonstrations. 

Our doubt will also apply to other matters which we previously regarded 
as most certain — even the demonstrations of mathematics and even the 
principles which we hitherto considered to be self-evident. One reason 
for this is that we have sometimes seen people make mistakes in such 
matters and accept as most certain and self-evident things which seemed 
false to us. Secondly, and most importantly, we have been told that there 
is an omnipotent God who created us. Now we do not know whether he 
may have wished to make us beings of the sort who are always deceived 
even in those matters which seem to us supremely evident; for such 
constant deception seems no less a possibility than the occasional 
deception which, as we have noticed on previous occasions, does occur. 
We may of course suppose that our existence derives not from a 
supremely powerful God but either from ourselves or from some other 
source; but in that case, the less powerful we make the author of our 
coming into being, the more likely it will be that we are so imperfect as to 
be deceived all the time. 


6. We have free will, enabling us to withhold our assent in doubtful 
matters and hence avoid error. 

But whoever turns out to have created us, and however powerful and 
however deceitful he may be, in the meantime we nonetheless experience 
within us the kind of freedom which enables us always to refrain from 
believing things which are not completely certain and thoroughly ex- 
amined. Hence we are able to take precautions against going wrong on 
any occasion. 


7. Itis not possible for us to doubt that we exist while we are doubting; 
and this is the first thing we come to know when we philosophize in 
an orderly way. 

In rejecting — and even imagining to be false — everything which we can in 

any way doubt, it is easy for us to suppose that there is no God and no 

heaven, and that there are no bodies, and even that we ourselves have no 
hands or feet, or indeed any body at all. But we cannot for all that 


Part One 195 


suppose that we, who are having such thoughts, are nothing. For it is a 
contradiction to suppose that what thinks does not, at the very time 
when it is thinking, exist. Accordingly, this piece of knowledge’ — I am 
thinking, therefore I exist — is the first and most certain of all to occur to 
anyone who philosophizes in an orderly way. 


8. In this way we discover the distinction between soul and body, or 
between a thinking thing and a corporeal thing. 

This is the best way to discover the nature of the mind and the distinction 
between the mind and the body. For if we, who are supposing that 
everything which is distinct from us is false,* examine what we are, we 
see very clearly that neither extension nor shape nor local motion, nor 
anything of this kind which is attributable to a body, belongs to our 
nature, but that thought alone belongs to it. So our knowledge of our 
thought is prior to, and more certain than, our knowledge of any 
corporeal thing; for we have already perceived it, although we are still in 
doubt about other things. 


9. What is meant by ‘thought’. 

By the term ‘thought’, I understand everything which we are aware of as 
happening within us, in so far as we have awareness of it. Hence, 
thinking is to be identified here not merely with understanding, willing 
and imagining, but also with sensory awareness. For if I say ‘I 
am seeing, or I am walking, therefore I exist’, and take this as applying to 
vision or walking as bodily activities, then the conclusion is not 
absolutely certain. This is because, as often happens during sleep, it is 
possible for me to think I am seeing or walking, though my eyes are 
closed and I am not moving about; such thoughts might even be possible 
if | had no body at all. But if I take ‘seeing’ or ‘walking’ to apply to the 
actual sense or awareness of seeing or walking, then the conclusion is 
quite certain, since it relates to the mind, which alone has the sensation 
or thought that it is seeing or walking. 


10. Matters which are very simple and self-evident are only rendered 
more obscure by logical definitions, and should not be counted as 
items of knowledge which it takes effort to acquire. 

I shall not here explain many of the other terms which I have already 

used or will use in what follows, because they seem to me to be 

sufficiently self-evident. I have often noticed that philosophers make the 

1 ‘,.. this inference’ (French version). 

2 Lat. falsum. Descartes uses this term to refer not only to propositions which are false, but 

also to objects which are unreal, spurious or non-existent. The French version here reads: 


‘we who are now thinking that there is nothing outside of our thought which truly is or 
exists...” 


196 Principles of Philosophy 


mistake of employing logical definitions in an attempt to explain what 
was already very simple and self-evident; the result is that they only make 
matters more obscure. And when I said that the proposition I am 
thinking, therefore I exist is the first and most certain of all to occur to 
anyone who philosophizes in an orderly way, I did not in saying that 
deny that one must first know what thought, existence and certainty are, 
and that it is impossible that that which thinks should not exist, and so 
forth. But because these are very simple notions, and ones which on their 
own provide us with no knowledge of anything that exists, I did not 
think they needed to be listed. 


11. How our mind is better known than our body. 

In order to realize that the knowledge of our mind is not simply prior to 
and more certain than the knowledge of our body, but also more 
evident, we should notice something very well known by the natural 
light: nothingness possesses no attributes or qualities. It follows that, 
wherever we find some attributes or qualities, there is necessarily some 
thing or substance to be found for them to belong to; and the more 
attributes we discover in the same thing or substance, the clearer is our 
knowledge of that substance. Now we find more attributes in our mind 
than in anything else, as is manifest from the fact that whatever enables 
us to know anything else cannot but lead us to a much surer knowledge 
of our own mind. For example, if I judge that the earth exists from the 
fact that I touch it or see it, this very fact undoubtedly gives even greater 
support for the judgement that my mind exists. For it may perhaps be the 
case that I judge that I am touching the earth even though the earth does 
not exist at all; but it cannot be that, when I make this judgement, my 
mind which is making the judgement does not exist. And the same 
applies in other cases <regarding all the things that come into our mind, 
namely that we who think of them exist, even if they are false or have no 
existence>. 


12. Why this fact does not come to be known to all alike. 

Disagreement on this point has come from those who have not done their 
philosophizing in an orderly way; and the reason for it is simply that they 
have never taken sufficient care to distinguish the mind from the body. 
Although they may have put the certainty of their own existence before 
that of anything else, they failed to realize that they should have taken 
‘themselves’ in this context to mean their minds alone. They were 
inclined instead to take ‘themselves’ to mean only their bodies — the 
bodies which they saw with their eyes and touched with their hands, and 


Part One 197 


to which they incorrectly attributed the power of sense-perception; and 
this is what prevented them from perceiving the nature of the mind. 


13. The sense in which knowledge of all other things depends on the 
knowledge of God. 

The mind, then, knowing itself, but still in doubt about all other things, 
looks around in all directions in order to extend its knowledge further. 
First of all, it finds within itself ideas of many things; and so long as it 
merely contemplates these ideas and does not affirm or deny the existence 
outside itself of anything resembling them, it cannot be mistaken. Next, it 
finds certain common notions from which it constructs various proofs; 
and, for as long as it attends to them, it is completely convinced of their 
truth. For example, the mind has within itself ideas of numbers and 
shapes, and it also has such common notions as: If you add equals to 
equals the results will be equal; from these it is easy to demonstrate that 
the three angles of a triangle equal two right angles, and so on. And so 
the mind will be convinced of the truth of this and similar conclusions, so 
long as it attends to the premisses from which it deduced them. But it 
cannot attend to them all the time; and subsequently,! recalling that it is 
still ignorant as to whether it may have been created with the kind of 
nature that makes it go wrong even in matters which appear most 
evident, the mind sees that it has just cause to doubt such conclusions, 
and that the possession of certain knowledge will not be possible until it 
has come to know the author of its being. 


14. The existence of God is validly inferred from the fact that necessary 
existence is included in our concept of God. 

The mind next considers the various ideas which it has within itself, and 
finds that there is one idea — the idea of a supremely intelligent, 
supremely powerful and supremely perfect being — which stands out 
from all the others. <And it readily judges from what it perceives in this 
idea, that God, who is the supremely perfect being, is, or exists. For 
although it has distinct ideas of many other things it does not observe 
anything in them to guarantee the existence of their object.> In this one 
idea the mind recognizes existence — not merely the possible and 
contingent existence which belongs to the ideas of all the other things 
which it distinctly perceives, but utterly necessary and eternal existence. 
Now on the basis of its perception that, for example, it is necessarily 
contained in the idea of a triangle that its three angles should equal two 


1 ‘... when it happens that it remembers a conclusion without attending to the sequence 
which enables it to be demonstrated’ (added in French version). 


IO 


II 


198 Principles of Philosophy 


right angles, the mind is quite convinced that a triangle does have three 
angles equalling two right angles. In the same way, simply on the basis of 
its perception that necessary and eternal existence is contained in the idea 
of a supremely perfect being, the mind must clearly conclude that the 
supreme being does exist. 


15. Our concepts of other things do not similarly contain necessary 
existence, but merely contingent existence. 
The mind will be even more inclined to accept this if it considers that it 
cannot find within itself an idea of any other thing such that necessary 
existence is seen to be contained in the idea in this way. And from this it 
understands that the idea of a supremely perfect being is not an idea 
which was invented by the mind, or which represents some chimera, but 
that it represents a true and immutable nature which cannot but exist, 
since necessary existence is contained within it. 


16. Preconceived opinions prevent the necessity of the existence of God 
from being clearly recognized by everyone. 

Our mind will, as I say, easily accept this, provided that it has first of all 
completely freed itself from preconceived opinions. But we have got into 
the habit of distinguishing essence from existence in the case of all other 
things; and we are also in the habit of making up at will various ideas of 
things which do not exist anywhere and have never done so. Hence, at 
times when we are not intent on the contemplation of the supremely 
perfect being, a doubt may easily arise as to whether the idea of God is 
not one of those which we made up at will, or at least one of those which 
do not include existence in their essence. 


17. The greater the objective perfection in any of our ideas, the greater 
its cause must be. 

When we reflect further on the ideas that we have within us, we see that 
some of them, in so far as they are merely modes of thinking, do not 
differ much one from another; but in so far as one idea represents one 
thing and another represents another, they differ widely; and the greater 
the amount of objective! perfection they contain within themselves, the 
more perfect their cause must be. For example, if someone has within 
himself the idea of a highly intricate machine, it would be fair to ask what 
was the cause of his possession of the idea: did he somewhere see such a 
machine made by someone else; or did he make such a close study of 
mechanics, or is his own ingenuity so great, that he was able to think it 
up on his own, although he never saw it anywhere? All the intricacy 


1 If an idea represents some object which is F, the idea is said to possess ‘objective’ F-ness, 
or to contain F-ness ‘objectively’. Cf. Med. ut: vol. 0, p. 28. 


Part One 199 


which is contained in the idea merely objectively — as in a picture — must 
be contained in its cause, whatever kind of cause it turns out to be; and it 
must be contained not merely objectively or representatively, but in 
actual reality, either formally or eminently,! at least in the case of the first 
and principal cause. 


18. This gives us a second reason for concluding that God exists. 

Since, then, we have within us the idea of God, or a supreme being, 
we may rightly inquire into the cause of our possession of this idea. 
Now we find in the idea such immeasurable greatness that we are quite 
certain that it could have been placed in us only by something which 
truly possesses the sum of all perfections, that is, by a God who really 
exists. For it is very evident by the natural light not only that nothing 
comes from nothing but also that what is more perfect cannot be 
produced by — that is, cannot have as its efficient and total cause — what is 
less perfect. Furthermore, we cannot have within us the idea or image of 
anything without there being somewhere, either within us or outside us, 
an original which contains in reality all the perfections belonging to the 
idea. And since the supreme perfections of which we have an idea are in 
no way to be found in us, we rightly conclude that they reside in 
something distinct from ourselves, namely God — or certainly that they 
once did so, from which it most evidently follows that they are still there. 


19. Even if we do not grasp the nature of God, his perfections are 
known to us more clearly than any other thing. 

This is sufficiently certain and manifest to those who are used to 
contemplating the idea of God and to considering his supreme perfec- 
tions. Although we do not fully grasp these perfections, since it is in the 
nature of an infinite being not to be fully grasped by us, who are finite, 
nonetheless we are able to understand them more clearly and distinctly 
than any corporeal things. This is because they permeate our thought to a 
greater extent, being simpler and unobscured by any limitations. 
<Furthermore, there is no reflection which can better serve to perfect our 
understanding, or which is more important than this, in so far as the 
consideration of an object which has no limits to its perfections fills us 
with satisfaction and assurance.> 


20. We did not make ourselves, but were made by God; and 
consequently he exists. 

However, this is something that not everyone takes note of. When people 

have an idea of some intricate machine, they generally know 


1 To possess a property formally is to possess it strictly as defined; to possess it eminently is 
to possess it in some higher or more perfect form. 


Iz 


3 


200 Principles of Philosophy 


where they got the idea from; but we do not in the same way have a 
recollection of the idea of God being sent to us from God, since we have 
always possessed it. Accordingly, we should now go on to inquire into 
the source of our being, given that we have within us an idea of the 
supreme perfections of God. Now it is certainly very evident by the 
natural light that a thing which recognizes something more perfect than 
itself is not the source of its own being; for if so, it would have given itself 
all the perfections of which it has an idea. Hence, the source of its being 


can only be something which possesses within itself all these perfections — 
that is, God. 


21. The fact that our existence has duration is sufficient to demonstrate 
the existence of God. 

It will be impossible for anything to obscure the clarity of this proof, if 
we attend to the nature of time or of the duration of things. For the 
nature of time is such that its parts are not mutually dependent, and 
never coexist. Thus, from the fact that we now exist, it does not follow 
that we shall exist a moment from now, unless there is some cause — the 
same cause which originally produced us — which continually reproduces 
us, as it were, that is to say, which keeps us in existence. For we easily 
understand that there is no power in us enabling us to keep ourselves in 
existence. We also understand that he who has so great a power that he 
can keep us in existence, although we are distinct from him, must be all 
the more able to keep himself in existence; or rather, he requires no other 
being to keep him in existence, and hence, in short, is God. 


22. Our method of recognizing the existence of God leads to the 
simultaneous recognition of all the other attributes of God, in so far 
as they can be known by the natural power of the mind. 

There is a great advantage in proving the existence of God by this 

method, that is to say, by means of the idea of God. For the method 

enables us at the same time to come to know the nature of God, in so far 
as the feebleness of our nature allows. For when we reflect on the idea of 

God which we were born with, we see that he is eternal, omniscient, 

omnipotent, the source of all goodness and truth, the creator of all 

things, and finally, that he possesses within him everything in which we 
can clearly recognize some perfection that is infinite or unlimited by any 
imperfection. 


23. God is not corporeal, and does not perceive through the senses as we 
do; and he does not will the evil of sin. 

There are many things such that, although we recognize some perfection 

in them, we also find in them some imperfection or limitation, and 


Part One 201 


these therefore cannot belong to God. For example, the nature of body 
includes divisibility along with extension in space, and since being 
divisible is an imperfection, it is certain that God is not a body. Again, the 
fact that we perceive through the senses is for us a perfection of a kind; 
but all sense-perception involves being acted upon, and to be acted upon 
is to be dependent on something else. Hence it cannot in any way be 
supposed that God perceives by means of the senses, but only that he 
understands and wills. And even his understanding and willing does not 
happen, as in our case, by means of operations that are in a certain sense 
distinct one from another; we must rather suppose that there is always a 
single identical and perfectly simple act by means of which he simul- 
taneously understands, wills and accomplishes everything. When I say 
‘everything’ I mean all things: for God does not will the evil of sin, which 
is not a thing. 


24. We pass from knowledge of God to knowledge of his creatures by 
remembering that he is infinite and we are finite. 

Now since God alone is the true cause of everything which is or can be, it 
is very clear that the best path to follow when we philosophize will be to 
start from the knowledge of God himself and try to deduce an explana- 
tion of the things created by him. This is the way to acquire the most 
perfect scientific knowledge, that is, knowledge of effects through their 
causes. In order to tackle this task with a reasonable degree of safety and 
without risk of going wrong we must take the precaution of always 
bearing in mind as carefully as possible both that God, the creator of all 
things, is infinite, and that we are altogether finite. 


25. We must believe everything which God has revealed, even though it 
may be beyond our grasp. 

Hence, if God happens to reveal to us something about himself or others 
which is beyond the natural reach of our mind — such as the mystery of 
the Incarnation or of the Trinity — we will not refuse to believe it, despite 
the fact that we do not clearly understand it. And we will not be at all 
surprised that there is much, both in the immeasurable nature of God and 
in the things created by him, which is beyond our mental capacity. 


26. We should never enter into arguments about the infinite. Things in 
which we observe no limits — such as the extension of the world, the 
division of the parts of matter, the number of the stars, and so on — 
should instead be regarded as indefinite. 

Thus we will never be involved in tiresome arguments about the infinite. 

For since we are finite, it would be absurd for us to determine anything 


14 


TS 


16 


202 Principles of Philosophy 


concerning the infinite; for this would be to attempt to limit it and grasp 
it. So we shall not bother to reply to those who ask if half an infinite line 
would itself be infinite, or whether an infinite number is odd or even, and 
so on. It seems that nobody has any business to think about such matters 
unless he regards his own mind as infinite. For our part, in the case of 
anything in which, from some point of view, we are unable to discover a 
limit, we shall avoid asserting that it is infinite, and instead regard it as 
indefinite. There is, for example, no imaginable extension which is so 
great that we cannot understand the possibility of an even greater one; 
and so we shall describe the size of possible things as indefinite. Again, 
however many parts a body is divided into, each of the parts can still be 
understood to be divisible and so we shall hold that quantity is 
indefinitely divisible. Or again, no matter how great we imagine the 
number of stars to be, we still think that God could have created even 
more; and so we will suppose the number of stars to be indefinite. And 
the same will apply in other cases. 


27. The difference between the indefinite and the infinite. 

Our reason for using the term ‘indefinite’ rather than ‘infinite’ in these 
cases is, in the first place, so as to reserve the term ‘infinite’ for God alone. 
For in the case of God alone, not only do we fail to recognize any limits in 
any respect, but our understanding positively tells us that there are none. 
Secondly, in the case of other things, our understanding does not in the 
same way positively tell us that they lack limits in some respect; we 
merely acknowledge in a negative way that any limits which they may 
have cannot be discovered by us. 


28. It is not the final but the efficient causes of created things that we 
must inquire into. 

When dealing with natural things we will, then, never derive any 
explanations from the purposes which God or nature may have had in 
view when creating them <and we shall entirely banish from our 
philosophy the search for final causes>. For we should not be so arrogant 
as to suppose that we can share in God’s plans. We should, instead, 
consider him as the efficient cause of all things; and starting from the 
divine attributes which by God’s will we have some knowledge of, we 
shall see, with the aid of our God-given natural light, what conclusions 
should be drawn concerning those effects which are apparent to our 
senses.! At the same time we should remember, as noted earlier, that the 


1 ‘... and we shall be assured that what we have once clearly and distinctly perceived to 
belong to the nature of these things has the perfection of being true’ (added in French 
version, which also omits the last sentence of this article). 


Part One 2.03 


natural light is to be trusted only to the extent that it is compatible with 
divine revelation. 


29. God is not the cause of our errors. 

The first attribute of God that comes under consideration here is that he 
is supremely truthful and the giver of all light. So it is a complete 
contradiction to suppose that he might deceive us or be, in the strict and 
positive sense, the cause of the errors to which we know by experience 
that we are prone. For although the ability to deceive may perhaps be 
regarded among us men as a sign of intelligence, the will to deceive must 
undoubtedly always come from malice, or from fear and weakness, and 
so cannot belong to God. 


30. It follows that everything that we clearly perceive is true; and this 
removes the doubts mentioned earlier. 

It follows from this that the light of nature or faculty of knowledge which 
God gave us can never encompass any object which is not true in so far as 
it is indeed encompassed by this faculty, that is, in so far as it is clearly 
and distinctly perceived. For God would deserve to be called a deceiver if 
the faculty which he gave us was so distorted that it mistook the false for 
the true <even when we were using it properly>. This disposes of the most 
serious doubt which arose from our ignorance about whether our nature 
might not be such as to make us go wrong even in matters which 
seemed to us utterly evident. Indeed, this argument easily demolishes all 
the other reasons for doubt which were mentioned earlier. Mathematical 
truths should no longer be suspect, since they are utterly clear to us. And 
as for our senses, if we notice anything here that is clear and distinct, no 
matter whether we are awake or asleep, then provided we separate it 
from what is confused and obscure we will easily recognize — whatever 
the thing in question — which are the aspects that may be regarded as 
true. There is no need for me to expand on this point here, since I have 
already dealt with it in the Meditations on Metaphysics;' and a more 
precise explanation of the point requires knowledge of what I shall be 
saying later on. 


31. Our errors, if considered in relation to God, are merely negations; if 
considered in relation to ourselves they are privations. 

Yet although God is no deceiver, it often happens that we fall into error. 

In order to investigate the origin and cause of our errors and learn to 

guard against them, we should realize that they do not depend on our 


1 Cf. Med. vi: vol. u, pp. 5 4ff. 


17 


18 


204 Principles of Philosophy 


intellect so much as on our will. Moreover, errors are not things, 
requiring the real concurrence of God for their production. Considered in 
relation to God they are merely negations,! and considered in relation to 
ourselves they are privations. 


32. We possess only two modes of thinking: the perception of the 
intellect and the operation of the will. 

All the modes of thinking that we experience within ourselves can be 
brought under two general headings: perception, or the operation of the 
intellect, and volition, or the operation of the will. Sensory perception, 
imagination and pure understanding are simply various modes of 
perception; desire, aversion, assertion, denial and doubt are various 
modes of willing. 


33. We fall into error only when we make judgements about things 
which we have not sufficiently perceived. 

Now when we perceive something, so long as we do not make any 
assertion or denial about it, we clearly avoid error. And we equally avoid 
error when we confine our assertions or denials to what we clearly and 
distinctly perceive should be asserted or denied. Error arises only when, 
as often happens, we make a judgement about something even though we 
do not have an accurate perception of it. 


34. Making a judgement requires not only the intellect but also the will. 
In order to make a judgement, the intellect is of course required since, in 
the case of something which we do not in any way perceive, there is no 
judgement we can make. But the will is also required so that, once 
something is perceived in some manner, our assent may then be given. 
Now a judgement — some kind of judgement at least — can be made 
without the need for a complete and exhaustive perception of the thing in 
question; for we can assent to many things which we know only in a very 
obscure and confused manner. 


35. The scope of the will is wider than that of the intellect, and this is the 
cause of error. 

Moreover, the perception of the intellect extends only to the few objects 

presented to it, and is always extremely limited. The will, on the other 

hand, can in a certain sense be called infinite, since we observe without 

exception that its scope extends to anything that can possibly be an 

object of any other will — even the immeasurable will of God. So it is easy 


1 ‘,.. that is, he did not bestow on us everything which he was able to bestow, but which 
equally we can see he was not obliged to give us’ (added in French version). 


Part One 205 


for us to extend our will beyond what we clearly perceive; and when we 
do this it is no wonder that we may happen to go wrong. 


36. Our errors cannot be imputed to God. 

But it must not in any way be imagined that, because God did not give us 
an omniscient intellect, this makes him the author of our errors. For it is 
of the nature of a created intellect to be finite; and it is of the nature of a 
finite intellect that its scope should not extend to everything. 


37. The supreme perfection of man is that he acts freely or voluntarily, 
and it is this which makes him deserve praise or blame. 

The extremely broad scope of the will is part of its very nature. And it is a 
supreme perfection in man that he acts voluntarily, that is, freely; this 
makes him in a special way the author of his actions and deserving of 
praise for what he does. We do not praise automatons for accurately 
producing all the movements they were designed to perform, because the 
production of these movements occurs necessarily. It is the designer 
who is praised for constructing such carefully-made devices; for in 
constructing them he acted not out of necessity but freely. By the same 
principle, when we embrace the truth, our doing so voluntarily is much 
more to our credit than would be the case if we could not do otherwise. 


38. The fact that we fall into error is a defect in the way we act, not a 
defect in our nature. The faults of subordinates may often be 
attributed to their masters, but never to God. 

The fact that we fall into error is a defect in the way we act or in the use 
we make of our freedom, but not a defect in our nature. For our nature 
remains the same whether we judge correctly or incorrectly. And 
although God could have endowed our intellect with a discernment so 
acute as to prevent our ever going wrong, we have no right to 
demand this of him. Admittedly, when one of us men has the power to 
prevent some evil, but does not prevent it, we say that he is the cause of 
the evil; but we must not similarly suppose that because God could have 
brought it about that we never went wrong, this makes him the cause of 
our errors. The power which men have over each other was given them 
so that they might employ it in discouraging others from evil; but the 
power which God has over all men is both absolute and totally free. So 
we should give him the utmost thanks for the goods which he has so 
lavishly bestowed upon us, instead of unjustly complaining that he did not 
bestow on us all the gifts which it was in his power to bestow. 


39. The freedom of the will is self-evident. 
That there is freedom in our will, and that we have power in many cases 
to give or withhold our assent at will, is so evident that it must be 


19 


20 


21 


206 Principles of Philosophy 


counted among the first and most common notions that are innate in us. 
This was obvious earlier on when, in our attempt to doubt everything, we 
went so far as to make the supposition of some supremely powerful 
author of our being who was attempting to deceive us in every possible 
way. For in spite of that supposition, the freedom which we experienced 
within us was nonetheless so great as to enable us to abstain from 
believing whatever was not quite certain or fully examined. And what we 
saw to be beyond doubt even during the period of that supposition is as 
self-evident and as transparently clear as anything can be. 


40. It is also certain that everything was preordained by God. 

But now that we have come to know God, we perceive in him a power so 
immeasurable that we regard it as impious to suppose that we could ever 
do anything which was not already preordained by him. And we can 
easily get ourselves into great difficulties if we attempt to reconcile this 
divine preordination with the freedom of our will, or attempt to grasp 
both these things at once. 


41. How to reconcile the freedom of our will with divine preordination. 
But we shall get out of these difficulties if we remember that our mind is 
finite, while the power of God is infinite — the power by which he not 
only knew from eternity whatever is or can be, but also willed it and 
preordained it. We may attain sufficient knowledge of this power to 
perceive clearly and distinctly that God possesses it; but we cannot get a 
sufficient grasp of it to see how it leaves the free actions of men 
undetermined. Nonetheless, we have such close awareness of the freedom 
and indifference which is in us, that there is nothing we can grasp more 
evidently or more perfectly. And it would be absurd, simply because we 
do not grasp one thing, which we know must by its very nature be 
beyond our comprehension, to doubt something else of which we have an 
intimate grasp and which we experience within ourselves. 


42. Although we do not want to go wrong, nevertheless we go wrong by 
our own will. 
Now that we know that all our errors depend on the will, it may seem 
surprising that we should ever go wrong, since there is no one who wants 
to go wrong. But there is a great difference between choosing to go wrong 
and choosing to give one’s assent in matters where, as it happens, error is 
to be found. And although there is in fact no one who expressly wishes to 
go wrong, there is scarcely anyone who does not often wish to give his 
assent to something which, though he does not know it, contains some 
error. Indeed, precisely because of their eagerness to find the truth, 


Part One 207 


people who do not know the right method of finding it often pass 
judgement on things of which they lack perception, and this is why they 
fall into error. 


43. We never go wrong when we assent only to what we clearly and 
distinctly perceive. 

It is certain, however, that we will never mistake the false for the true 
provided we give our assent only to what we clearly and distinctly 
perceive. I say that this is certain, because God is not a deceiver, and so 
the faculty of perception which he has given us cannot incline to 
falsehood; and the same goes for the faculty of assent, provided its scope 
is limited to what is clearly perceived. And even if there were no way of 
proving this, the minds of all of us have been so moulded by nature that 
whenever we perceive something clearly, we spontaneously give our 
assent to it and are quite unable to doubt its truth. 


44. When we give our assent to something which is not clearly 

perceived, this is always a misuse of our judgement, even if by 

chance we stumble on the truth. The giving of our assent to 

something unclear happens because we imagine that we clearly 

perceived it on some previous occasion. 
It is also certain that when we assent to some piece of reasoning when our 
perception of it is lacking, then either we go wrong, or, if we do stumble 
on the truth, it is merely by accident, so that we cannot be sure that we 
are not in error. Of course it seldom happens that we assent to something 
when we are aware of not perceiving it, since the light of nature tells 
us that we should never make a judgement except about things we 
know. What does very often give rise to error is that there are many 
things which we think we perceived in the past; once these things are 
committed to memory, we give our assent to them just as we would if 
we had fully perceived them, whereas in reality we never perceived 
them at all. 


45. What is meant by a clear perception, and by a distinct perception. 
Indeed there are very many people who in their entire lives never perceive 
anything with sufficient accuracy to enable them to make a judgement 
about it with certainty. A perception which can serve as the basis for a 
certain and indubitable judgement needs to be not merely clear but also 
distinct. I call a perception ‘clear’ when it is present and accessible to the 
attentive mind — just as we say that we see something clearly when it is 
present to the eye’s gaze and stimulates it with a sufficient degree of 
strength and accessibility. I call a perception ‘distinct’ if, as well as being 


22 


23 


208 Principles of Philosophy 


clear, it is so sharply separated from all other perceptions that it contains 
within itself only what is clear. 


46. The example of pain shows that a perception can be clear without 
being distinct, but cannot be distinct without being clear. 

For example, when someone feels an intense pain, the perception he has 
of it is indeed very clear, but is not always distinct. For people commonly 
confuse this perception with an obscure judgement they make concerning 
the nature of something which they think exists in the painful spot and 
which they suppose to resemble the sensation of pain; but in fact it is the 
sensation alone which they perceive clearly. Hence a perception can be 
clear without being distinct, but not distinct without being clear. 


47. In order to correct the preconceived opinions of our early childhood 
we must consider the simple notions and what elements in each of 
them are clear. 

In our childhood the mind was so immersed in the body that although 
there was much that it perceived clearly, it never perceived anything 
distinctly. But in spite of this the mind made judgements about many 
things, and this is the origin of the many preconceived opinions which 
most of us never subsequently abandon. To enable us to get rid of these 
preconceived opinions, I shall here briefly list all the simple notions 
which are the basic components of our thoughts; and in each case I shall 
distinguish the clear elements from those which are obscure or liable to 
lead us into error. 


48. All the objects of our perception may be regarded either as things or 
affections of things, or as eternal truths. The former are listed here. 
All the objects of our perception we regard either as things, or affections 
of things, or else as eternal truths which have no existence outside our 
thought.! The most general items which we regard as things are 
substance, duration, order, number and any other items of this kind 
which extend to all classes of things. But I recognize only two ultimate 
classes of things: first, intellectual or thinking things, i.e. those which 
pertain to mind or thinking substance; and secondly, material things, 
i.e. those which pertain to extended substance or body. Perception, 
volition and all the modes both of perceiving and of willing are referred 
to thinking substance; while to extended substance belong size 


1 An ‘affection’ of a thing is one of its qualities or modes; see art. 56, below. The French 
version omits this technical term and simply distinguishes between, on the one hand, 
‘things which have some existence’, and, on the other hand, ‘truths which are nothing 
outside our thought’. 


Part One 209 


(that is, extension in length, breadth and depth), shape, motion, 
position, divisibility of component parts and the like. But we also 
experience within ourselves certain other things which must not be 
referred either to the mind alone or to the body alone. These arise, as will 
be made clear later on, in the appropriate place,! from the close and 
intimate union of our mind with the body. This list includes, first, 
appetites like hunger and thirst; secondly, the emotions or passions of 
the mind which do not consist of thought alone, such as the emotions of 
anger, joy, sadness and love; and finally, all the sensations, such as those 
of pain, pleasure, light, colours, sounds, smells, tastes, heat, hardness and 
the other tactile qualities. 


49. It is not possible — or indeed necessary — to give a similar list of 
eternal truths. 

Everything in the preceding list we regard either as a thing or as a quality 
or mode of a thing. But when we recognize that it is impossible for 
anything to come from nothing, the proposition Nothing comes from 
nothing is regarded not as a really existing thing, or even as a mode of a 
thing, but as an eternal truth which resides within our mind. Such 
truths are termed common notions or axioms. The following are 
examples of this class: It is impossible for the same thing to be and not to 
be at the same time; What is done cannot be undone; He who thinks 
cannot but exist while he thinks; and countless others. It would not be 
easy to draw up a list of all of them; but nonetheless we cannot fail to 
know them when the occasion for thinking about them arises, provided 
that we are not blinded by preconceived opinions. 


50. Eternal truths are clearly perceived; but, because of preconceived 
opinions, not all of them are clearly perceived by everyone. 

In the case of these common notions, there is no doubt that they are 
capable of being clearly and distinctly perceived; for otherwise they 
would not properly be called common notions. But some of them do not 
really have an equal claim to be called ‘common’ among all people, since 
they are not equally well perceived by everyone. This is not, I think, 
because one man’s faculty of knowledge extends more widely than 
another’s, but because the common notions are in conflict with 
the preconceived opinions of some people who, as a result, cannot 
easily grasp them. But the selfsame notions are perceived with the 
utmost clarity by other people who are free from such preconceived 
opinions. 


1 See Part 4, art. 189-91, pp. 279ff below. 


24 


25 


210 Principles of Philosophy 


51. What is meant by ‘substance’ — aterm which does not apply 
univocally to God and his creatures. 

In the case of those items which we regard as things or modes of things, it 
is worthwhile examining each of them separately. By substance we can 
understand nothing other than a thing which exists in such a way as to 
depend on no other thing for its existence. And there is only one 
substance which can be understood to depend on no other thing whatso- 
ever, namely God. In the case of all other substances, we perceive that 
they can exist only with the help of God’s concurrence. Hence the term 
‘substance’ does not apply univocally, as they say in the Schools, to God 
and to other things; that is, there is no distinctly intelligible meaning of 
the term which is common to God and his creatures. <In the case of 
created things, some are of such a nature that they cannot exist without 
other things, while some need only the ordinary concurrence of God in 
order to exist. We make this distinction by calling the latter ‘substances’ 
and the former ‘qualities’ or ‘attributes’ of those substances.> 


52. The term ‘substance’ applies univocally to mind and to body. How a 
substance itself is known. 

But as for corporeal substance and mind (or created thinking sub- 
stance), these can be understood to fall under this common concept: 
things that need only the concurrence of God in order to exist. However, 
we cannot initially become aware of a substance merely through its being 
an existing thing, since this alone does not of itself have any effect on us. 
We can, however, easily come to know a substance by one of its 
attributes, in virtue of the common notion that nothingness possesses no 
attributes, that is to say, no properties or qualities. Thus, if we perceive 
the presence of some attribute, we can infer that there must also be 
present an existing thing or substance to which it may be attributed. 


53. To each substance there belongs one principal attribute; in the case 
of mind, this is thought, and in the case of body it is extension. 
A substance may indeed be known through any attribute at all; but each 
substance has one principal property which constitutes its nature and 
essence, and to which all its other properties are referred. Thus extension 
in length, breadth and depth constitutes the nature of corporeal sub- 
stance; and thought constitutes the nature of thinking substance. Every- 
thing else which can be attributed to body presupposes extension, and is 
merely a mode of an extended thing; and similarly, whatever we find in 
the mind is simply one of the various modes of thinking. For example, 
shape is unintelligible except in an extended thing; and motion is 


Part One 211 


unintelligible except as motion in an extended space; while imagination, 
sensation and will are intelligible only in a thinking thing. By contrast, it 
is possible to understand extension without shape or movement, and 
thought without imagination or sensation, and so on; and this is quite 
clear to anyone who gives the matter his attention. 


54. How we can have clear and distinct notions of thinking substance 
and of corporeal substance, and also of God. 

Thus we can easily have two clear and distinct notions or ideas, one of 
created thinking substance, and the other of corporeal substance, pro- 
vided we are careful to distinguish all the attributes of thought from the 
attributes of extension. We can also have a clear and distinct idea of 
uncreated and independent thinking substance, that is of God. Here we 
must simply avoid supposing that the idea adequately represents every- 
thing which is to be found in God; and we must not invent any additional 
features, but concentrate only on what is really contained in the idea and 
on what we clearly perceive to belong to the nature of a supremely 
perfect being. And certainly no one can deny that we possess such an 
idea of God, unless he reckons that there is absolutely no knowledge of 
God to be found in the minds of men. 


55. How we can also have a distinct understanding of duration, order 
and number. 

We shall also have a very distinct understanding of duration, order and 
number, provided we do not mistakenly tack on to them any concept of 
substance. Instead, we should regard the duration of a thing simply as a 
mode under which we conceive the thing in so far as it continues to exist. 
And similarly we should not regard order or number as anything separate 
from the things which are ordered and numbered, but should think of 
them simply as modes under which we consider the things in question. 
56. What modes, qualities and attributes are. 

By mode, as used above, we understand exactly the same as what is 
elsewhere meant by an attribute or quality. But we employ the term mode 
when we are thinking of a substance as being affected or modified; when 
the modification enables the substance to be designated as a substance of 
such and such a kind, we use the term quality; and finally, when we are 
simply thinking in a more general way of what is in a substance, we use 
the term attribute. Hence we do not, strictly speaking, say that there are 
modes or qualities in God, but simply attributes, since in the case of God, 
any variation is unintelligible. And even in the case of created things, that 
which always remains unmodified — for example existence or duration in 


26 


27 


28 


212 Principles of Philosophy 


a thing which exists and endures — should be called not a quality or a 
mode but an attribute. 


57. Some attributes are in things and others in thought. What duration 
and time are. 

Now some attributes or modes are in the very things of which they are 
said to be attributes or modes, while others are only in our thought. 
For example, when time is distinguished from duration taken in the 
general sense and called the measure of movement, it is simply a mode of 
thought. For the duration which we understand to be involved in 
movement is certainly no different from the duration involved in things 
which do not move. This is clear from the fact that if there are two bodies 
moving for an hour, one slowly and the other quickly, we do not reckon 
the amount of time to be greater in the latter case than the former, even 
though the amount of movement may be much greater. But in order to 
measure the duration of all things, we compare their duration with the 
duration of the greatest and most regular motions which give rise to years 
and days, and we call this duration ‘time’. Yet nothing is thereby added 
to duration, taken in its general sense, except for a mode of thought. 


58. Number and all universals are simply modes of thinking. 

In the same way, number, when it is considered simply in the abstract or 
in general, and not in any created things, is merely a mode of thinking; 
and the same applies to all the other universals, as we call them. 


59. How universals arise. The five common universals: genus, species, 
differentia, property, accident. 

These universals arise solely from the fact that we make use of one and 
the same idea for thinking of all individual items which resemble each 
other: we apply one and the same term to all the things which are 
represented by the idea in question, and this is the universal term. When 
we see two stones, for example, and direct our attention not to their 
nature but merely to the fact that there are two of them, we form the idea 
of the number which we call ‘two’; and when we later see two birds or two 
trees, and consider not their nature but merely the fact that there are two 
of them, we go back to the same idea as before. This, then, is the universal 
idea; and we always designate the number in question by the same 
universal term ‘two’. In the same way, when we see a figure made up of 
three lines, we form an idea of it which we call the idea of a triangle; and 
we later make use of it as a universal idea, so as to represent to our mind 
all the other figures made up of three lines. Moreover, when we notice 
that some triangles have one right angle, and others do not, we form the 


Part One 213 


universal idea of a right-angled triangle; since this idea is related to the 
preceding idea as a special case, it is termed a species. And the 
rectangularity is the universal differentia which distinguishes all right- 
angled triangles from other triangles. And the fact that the square on the 
hypotenuse is equal to the sum of the squares on the other two sides is a 
property belonging to all and only right-angled triangles. Finally, if we 
suppose that some right-angled triangles are in motion while others are not, 
this will be a universal accident of such triangles. Hence five universals 
are commonly listed: genus, species, differentia, property and accident. 


60. Three sorts of distinction: firstly, what is meant by a ‘real 
distinction’. 

Now number, in things themselves, arises from the distinction between 
them. But distinction can be taken in three ways: as a real distinction, a 
modal distinction, or a conceptual distinction. Strictly speaking, a real 
distinction exists only between two or more substances; and we can 
perceive that two substances are really distinct simply from the fact that 
we can clearly and distinctly understand one apart from the other. For 
when we come to know God, we are certain that he can bring about 
anything of which we have a distinct understanding. For example, even 
though we may not yet know for certain that any extended or corporeal 
substance exists in reality, the mere fact that we have an idea of such a 
substance enables us to be certain that it is capable of existing. And we 
can also be certain that, if it exists, each and every part of it, as delimited 
by us in our thought, is really distinct from the other parts of the same 
substance. Similarly, from the mere fact that each of us understands 
himself to be a thinking thing and is capable, in thought, of excluding 
from himself every other substance, whether thinking or extended, it is 
certain that each of us, regarded in this way, is really distinct from every 
other thinking substance and from every corporeal substance. And even 
if we suppose that God has joined some corporeal substance to such a 
thinking substance so closely that they cannot be more closely conjoined, 
thus compounding them into a unity, they nonetheless remain really 
distinct. For no matter how closely God may have united them, the 
power which he previously had of separating them, or keeping one in 
being without the other, is something he could not lay aside; and things 
which God has the power to separate, or to keep in being separately, are 
really distinct. 


61. What is meant by a ‘modal distinction’. 
A modal distinction can be taken in two ways: firstly, as a distinction 
between a mode, properly so called, and the substance of which it is a 


29 


30 


214 Principles of Philosophy 


mode; and secondly, as a distinction between two modes of the same 
substance. The first kind of modal distinction can be recognized from the 
fact that we can clearly perceive a substance apart from the mode which 
we say differs from it, whereas we cannot, conversely, understand the 
mode apart from the substance. Thus there is a modal distinction 
between shape or motion and the corporeal substance in which they 
inhere; and similarly, there is a modal distinction between affirmation 
or recollection and the mind. The second kind of modal distinction is 
recognized from the fact that we are able to arrive at knowledge of one 
mode apart from another, and vice versa, whereas we cannot know either 
mode apart from the substance in which they both inhere. For example, if 
a stone is in motion and is square-shaped, I can understand the square 
shape without the motion and, conversely, the motion without the square 
shape; but I can understand neither the motion nor the shape apart from 
the substance of the stone. A different case, however, is the distinction by 
which the mode of one substance is distinct from another substance or 
from the mode of another substance. An example of this is the way in 
which the motion of one body is distinct from another body, or from the 
mind; or the way in which motion differs from doubt.! It seems more 
appropriate to call this kind of distinction a real distinction, rather than 
a modal distinction, since the modes in question cannot be clearly 
understood apart from the really distinct substances of which they are 
modes. 


62. What is meant by a ‘conceptual distinction’. 

Finally, a conceptual distinction is a distinction between a substance and 
some attribute of that substance without which the substance is 
unintelligible; alternatively, it is a distinction between two such attributes 
of a single substance. Such a distinction is recognized by our inability to 
form a clear and distinct idea of the substance if we exclude from it the 
attribute in question, or, alternatively, by our inability to perceive 
clearly the idea of one of the two attributes if we separate it from the 
other. For example, since a substance cannot cease to endure without 
also ceasing to be, the distinction between the substance and its duration 
is merely a conceptual one. And in the case of all the modes of thought? 
which we consider as being in objects, there is merely a conceptual 
distinction between the modes and the object which they are thought of 
as applying to; and the same is true of the distinction between the modes 


1 In place of dubitatione (‘doubt’) AT read duratione (‘duration’); the former reading is 
undoubtedly correct, and is followed in the French version. 
2 See above, art. 57 and 58. 


Part One 215 


themselves when these are in one and the same object.! I am aware that 
elsewhere I did lump this type of distinction with the modal distinction, 
namely at the end of my Replies to the First Set of Objections to the 
Meditations on First Philosophy’; but that was not a suitable place for 
making a careful distinction between the two types; it was enough for my 
purposes to distinguish both from the real distinction. 


63. How thought and extension may be distinctly recognized as 
constituting the nature of mind and of body. 

Thought and extension can be regarded as constituting the natures of 
intelligent substance and corporeal substance; they must then be 
considered as nothing else but thinking substance itself and extended 
substance itself — that is, as mind and body. In this way we will have a 
very clear and distinct understanding of them. Indeed, it is much easier 
for us to have an understanding of extended substance or thinking 
substance than it is for us to understand substance on its own, leaving 
out the fact that it thinks or is extended. For we have some difficulty in 
abstracting the notion of substance from the notions of thought and 
extension, since the distinction between these notions and the notion of 
substance itself is merely a conceptual distinction. A concept is not 
any more distinct because we include less in it; its distinctness simply 
depends on our carefully distinguishing what we do include in it from 
everything else. 


64. How thought and extension may also be distinctly recognized as 
modes of a substance. 
Thought and extension may also be taken as modes of a substance, in so 
far as one and the same mind is capable of having many different 
thoughts; and one and the same body, with its quantity unchanged, may 
be extended in many different ways (for example, at one moment it may 
be greater in length and smaller in breadth or depth, and a little later, by 
contrast, it may be greater in breadth and smaller in length).? The 
distinction between thought or extension and the substance will then be 
a modal one; and our understanding of them will be capable of being 
just as clear and distinct as our understanding of the substance itself, 
provided they are regarded not as substances (that is, things which are 
separate from other things) but simply as modes of things. By regarding 
1 For this sentence the French version substitutes: ‘And in general all the attributes which 
cause us to have different thoughts concerning a single thing, such as the extension of a 
body and its property of being divided into several parts, do not differ from the body ... 
or from each other, except in so far as we sometimes think confusedly of one without 


thinking of the other.’ 2 See vol. 11, pp. 85f. 
3 Cf. the example of the wax in Med. 1: vol. 11, p. 20. 


31 


32 


216 Principles of Philosophy 


them as being in the substances of which they are modes, we distinguish 
them from the substances in question and see them for what they really 
are. If, on the other hand, we attempted to consider them apart from the 
substances in which they inhere, we would be regarding them as things 
which subsisted in their own right, and would thus be confusing the ideas 
of a mode and a substance. 


65. How the modes of thought and extension are to be known. 

There are various modes of thought such as understanding, imagination, 
memory, volition, and so on; and there are various modes of extension, 
or modes which belong to extension, such as all shapes, the positions of 
parts and the motions of the parts. And, just as before, we shall arrive at 
the best perception of all these items if we regard them simply as modes 
of the things in which they are located. As far as motion is concerned, it 
will be best if we think simply of local motion, without inquiring into the 
force which produces it (though I shall attempt to explain this later in the 
appropriate place!). 


66. How sensations, emotions and appetites may be clearly known, 
despite the fact that we are frequently wrong in our judgements 
concerning them. 

There remains sensations, emotions and appetites.” These may be clearly 

perceived provided we take great care in our judgements concerning 

them to include no more than what is strictly contained in our perception 

— no more than that of which we have inner awareness. But this is a very 

difficult rule to observe, at least with regard to sensations. For all of us 

have, from our early childhood, judged that all the objects of our 
sense-perception are things existing outside our minds and closely 
resembling our sensations, i.e. the perceptions that we had of them. Thus, 
on seeing a colour, for example, we supposed we were seeing a thing 
located outside us which closely resembled the idea of colour that we 
experienced within us at the time. And this was something that, because 
of our habit of making such judgements, we thought we saw clearly and 


distinctly — so much so that we took it for something certain and 
indubitable. 


67. We frequently make mistakes, even in our judgements concerning 
pain. 

The same thing happens with regard to everything else of which we have 

sensory awareness, even to pleasure and pain. For, although we do not 


1 In Part 2; see especially art. 43 and 44. 
2 These are the items remaining from the objects of perception listed above, art. 48. 


Part One 217 


suppose that these exist outside us, we generally regard them not as being 
in the mind alone, or in our perception, but as being in the hand or foot 
or in some other part of our body. But the fact that we feel a pain as it 
were in our foot does not make it certain that the pain exists outside our 
mind, in the foot, any more than the fact that we see light as it were in the 
sun, makes it certain the light exists outside us, in the sun. Both these 
beliefs are preconceived opinions of our early childhood, as will become 
clear below. 


68. How to distinguish what we clearly know in such matters from what 
can lead us astray. 

In order to distinguish what is clear in this connection from what is 
obscure, we must be very careful to note that pain and colour and so on 
are clearly and distinctly perceived when they are regarded merely as 
sensations or thoughts. But when they are judged to be real things 
existing outside our mind, there is no way of understanding what sort of 
things they are. If someone says he sees colour in a body or feels pain in a 
limb, this amounts to saying that he sees or feels something there of 
which he is wholly ignorant, or, in other words, that he does not know 
what he is seeing or feeling. Admittedly, if he fails to pay sufficient 
attention, he may easily convince himself that he has some knowledge of 
what he sees or feels, because he may suppose that it is something similar 
to the sensation of colour or pain which he experiences within himself. 
But if he examines the nature of what is represented by the sensation of 
colour or pain — what is represented as existing in the coloured body or 
the painful part — he will realize that he is wholly ignorant of it. 


69. We know size, shape and so forth in quite a different way from the 
way in which we know colours, pains and the like. 

This will be especially clear if we consider the wide gap between our 
knowledge of those features of bodies which we clearly perceive, as 
stated earlier,! and our knowledge of those features which must be 
referred to the senses, as I have just pointed out. To the former class 
belong the size of the bodies we see, their shape, motion, position, 
duration, number and so on (by ‘motion’ I mean local motion: philo- 
sophers have imagined that there are other kinds of motion distinct from 
local motion, thereby only making the nature of motion less intelligible 
to themselves).? To the latter class belong the colour in a body, as well as 


1 See above, art. 48. 

2 By ‘local motion’ is meant, roughly, movement from place to place (see further Part 2, art. 
24 and 25, below pp. 233f). Scholastic philosophers, following Aristotle, sometimes 
classified any alteration (e.g. a quantitative or a qualitative change) as a type of motion; 
various other distinctions, e.g. that between ‘natural’ and ‘violent’ motion, were also 
commonplace. See also The World, p. 94 above. 


33 


34 


35 


218 Principles of Philosophy 


pain, smell, taste and so on. It is true that when we see a body we are just 
as certain of its existence in virtue of its having a visible colour as we are 
in virtue of its having a visible shape; but our knowledge of what it is for 
the body to have a shape is much clearer than our knowledge of what it is 
for it to be coloured. 


70. There are two ways of making judgements concerning the things 
that can be perceived by the senses: the first enables us to avoid 
error, while the second allows us to fall into error. 

It is clear, then, that when we say that we perceive colours in objects, this 
is really just the same as saying that we perceive something in the objects 
whose nature we do not know, but which produces in us a certain very 
clear and vivid sensation which we call the sensation of colour. But the 
way in which we make our judgement can vary very widely. As long as 
we merely judge that there is in the objects (that is, in the things, 
whatever they may turn out to be, which are the source of our sensations) 
something whose nature we do not know, then we avoid error; indeed, 
we are actually guarding against error, since the recognition that we are 
ignorant of something makes us less liable to make any rash judgement 
about it. But it is quite different when we suppose that we perceive 
colours in objects. Of course, we do not really know what it is that we are 
calling a colour; and we cannot find any intelligible resemblance between 
the colour which we suppose to be in objects and that which we 
experience in our sensation. But this is something we do not take account 
of; and, what is more, there are many other features, such as size, shape 
and number which we clearly perceive to be actually or at least possibly 
present in objects in a way exactly corresponding to our sensory 
perception or understanding. And so we easily fall into the error of 
judging that what is called colour in objects is something exactly like the 
colour of which we have sensory awareness; and we make the mistake of 
thinking that we clearly perceive what we do not perceive at all. 


71. The chief cause of error arises from the preconceived opinions of 
childhood. 

It is here that the first and main cause of all our errors may be recognized. 
In our early childhood the mind was so closely tied to the body that it had 
no leisure for any thoughts except those by means of which it had sensory 
awareness of what was happening to the body. It did not refer these 
thoughts to anything outside itself, but merely felt pain when something 
harmful was happening to the body and felt pleasure when something 
beneficial occurred. And when nothing very beneficial or harmful was 
happening to the body, the mind had various sensations corresponding to 


Part One 219 


the different areas where, and ways in which, the body was being 
stimulated, namely what we call the sensations of tastes, smells, sounds, 
heat, cold, light, colours and so on — sensations which do not represent 
anything located outside our thought.'! At the same time the mind 
perceived sizes, shapes, motions and so on, which were presented to it 
not as sensations but as things, or modes of things, existing (or at least 
capable of existing) outside thought, although it was not yet aware of the 
difference between things and sensations. The next stage arose when the 
mechanism of the body, which is so constructed by nature that it has the 
ability to move in various ways by its own power, twisted around 
aimlessly in all directions in its random attempts to pursue the beneficial 
and avoid the harmful; at this point the mind that was attached to the 
body began to notice that the objects of this pursuit or avoidance had an 
existence outside itself. And it attributed to them not only sizes, shapes, 
motions and the like, which it perceived as things or modes of things, 
but also tastes, smells and so on, the sensations of which were, it realized, 
produced by the objects in question. Moreover, since the mind judged 
everything in terms of its utility to the body in which it was immersed, it 
assessed the amount of reality in each object by the extent to which it was 
affected by it. As a result, it supposed that there was more substance or 
corporeality in rocks and metals than in water or air, since it felt more 
hardness and heaviness in them. Indeed, it regarded the air as a mere 
nothing, so long as it felt no wind or cold or heat in it. And because the 
light coming from the stars appeared no brighter than that produced by 
the meagre glow of an oil lamp, it did not imagine any star as being any 
bigger than this. And because it did not observe that the earth turns on its 
axis or that its surface is curved to form a globe, it was rather inclined to 
suppose that the earth was immobile and its surface flat. Right from 
infancy our mind was swamped with a thousand such preconceived 
Opinions; and in later childhood, forgetting that they were adopted 
without sufficient examination, it regarded them as known by the senses 
or implanted by nature, and accepted them as utterly true and evident. 


72. The second cause of error is that we cannot forget our preconceived 
Opinions. 

In later years the mind is no longer a total slave to the body, and does not 

refer everything to it. Indeed, it inquires into the truth of things 

considered in themselves, and discovers very many of its previous 

judgements to be false. But despite this, it is not easy for the mind to erase 


1 ‘,.. but which vary according to the different movements which pass from all parts of our 
body to the part of the brain to which our mind is closely joined and united’ (added in 
French version). 


36 


220 Principles of Philosophy 


these false judgements from its memory; and as long as they stick there, 
they can cause a variety of errors. For example, in our early childhood we 

37 imagined the stars as being very small; and although astronomical 
arguments now clearly show us that they are very large indeed, our 
preconceived opinion is still strong enough to make it very hard for us to 
imagine them differently from the way we did before. 


73. The third cause of error is that we become tired if we have to attend 
to things which are not present to the senses; as a result, our 
judgements on these things are habitually based not on present 
perception but on preconceived opinion. 

What is more, our mind is unable to keep its attention on things without 

some degree of difficulty and fatigue; and it is hardest of all for it to 

attend to what is not present to the senses or even to the imagination. 

This may be due to the very nature that the mind has as a result of being 

joined to the body; or it may be because it was exclusively occupied with 

the objects of sense and imagination in its earliest years, and has thus 
acquired more practice and a greater aptitude for thinking about them 
than it has for thinking about other things. The result of this is that many 
people’s understanding of substance is still limited to that which is 
imaginable and corporeal, or even to that which is capable of being 
perceived by the senses. Such people do not know that the objects of the 
imagination are restricted to those which have extension, motion and 
shape, whereas there are many other things that are objects of the 

understanding. Also, they suppose that nothing can subsist unless it is a 

body, and that no body can subsist unless it can be perceived by the 

senses. Now since, as will be clearly shown below, there is nothing whose 
true nature we perceive by the senses alone, it turns out that most people 
have nothing but confused perceptions throughout their entire lives. 


74. The fourth cause of error is that we attach our concepts to words 
which do not precisely correspond to real things. 
Finally, because of the use of language, we tie all our concepts to the 
words used to express them; and when we store the concepts in our 
memory we always simultaneously store the corresponding words. Later 
on we find the words easier to recall than the things; and because of this 
it is very seldom that our concept of a thing is so distinct that we can 
separate it totally from our concept of the words involved. The thoughts 
of almost all people are more concerned with words than with things; 
and as a result people very often give their assent to words they do not 
38 understand, thinking they once understood them, or that they got them 


Part One 221 


from others who did understand them correctly. This is not the place to 
give a precise account of all these matters, since the nature of the human 
body has not yet been dealt with — indeed the existence of any body has 
not yet been proved. Nonetheless, what has been said appears to be 
sufficiently intelligible to help us distinguish those of our concepts which 
are clear and distinct from those which are obscure and confused. 


75. Summary of the rules to be observed in order to philosophize 
correctly. 

In order to philosophize seriously and search out the truth about all the 
things that are capable of being known, we must first of all lay aside all 
our preconceived opinions, or at least we must take the greatest care not 
to put our trust in any of the opinions accepted by us in the past until we 
have first scrutinized them afresh and confirmed their truth. Next, we 
must give our attention in an orderly way to the notions that we have 
within us, and we must judge to be true all and only those whose truth we 
clearly and distinctly recognize when we attend to them in this way. 
When we do this we shall realize, first of all, that we exist in so far as our 
nature consists in thinking; and we shall simultaneously realize both that 
there is a God, and that we depend on him, and also that a consideration 
of his attributes enables us to investigate the truth of other things, since 
he is their cause. Finally, we will see that besides the notions of God and 
of our mind, we have within us knowledge of many propositions which 
are eternally true, such as ‘Nothing comes from nothing’. We shall also 
find that we have knowledge both of a corporeal or extended nature 
which is divisible, moveable, and so on, and also of certain sensations 
which affect us, such as the sensations of pain, colours, tastes and so on 
(though we do not yet know the cause of our being affected in this way). 
When we contrast all this knowledge with the confused thoughts we had 
before, we will acquire the habit of forming clear and distinct concepts of 
all the things that can be known. These few instructions seem to me to 
contain the most important principles of human knowledge. 


76. Divine authority must be put before our own perception; but, that 
aside, the philosopher should give his assent only to what he has 
perceived. 

But above all else we must impress on our memory the overriding rule 

that whatever God has revealed to us must be accepted as more certain 

than anything else. And although the light of reason may, with the 
utmost clarity and evidence, appear to suggest something different, we 
must still put our entire faith in divine authority rather than in our own 
judgement. But on matters where we are not instructed by divine faith, it 


39 


222 Principles of Philosophy 


is quite unworthy of a philosopher to accept anything as true if he has 
never established its truth by thorough scrutiny; and he should never rely 
on the senses, that is, on the ill-considered judgements of his childhood, 
in preference to his mature powers of reason. 


PART TWO 
The Principles of Material Things 


1. The arguments that lead to the certain knowledge of the existence of 
material things. 


Everyone is quite convinced of the existence of material things. But 
earlier on we cast doubt on this belief and counted it as one of the 
preconceived opinions of our childhood.! So it is necessary for us to 
investigate next the arguments by which the existence of material things 
may be known with certainty. Now, all our sensations undoubtedly come 
to us from something that is distinct from our mind. For it is not in our 
power to make ourselves have one sensation rather than another; this is 
obviously dependent on the thing that is acting on our senses. Admittedly 
one can raise the question of whether this thing is God or something 
different from God. But we have sensory awareness of, or rather as a 
result of sensory stimulation we have a clear and distinct perception of, 
some kind of matter, which is extended in length, breadth and depth, and 
has various differently shaped and variously moving parts which give rise 
to our various sensations of colours, smells, pain and so on. And if God 
were himself immediately producing in our mind the idea of such 
extended matter, or even if he were causing the idea to be produced by 
something which lacked extension, shape and motion, there would be no 
way of avoiding the conclusion that he should be regarded as a deceiver. 
For we have a clear understanding of this matter as something that is 
quite different from God and from ourselves or our mind; and we appear 
to see clearly that the idea of it comes to us from things located outside 
ourselves, which it wholly sesembles. And we have already noted that it is 
quite inconsistent with the nature of God that he should be a deceiver.” 
The unavoidable conclusion, then, is that there exists something ex- 
tended in length, breadth and depth and possessing all the properties 
which we clearly perceive to belong to an extended thing. And it is this 
extended thing that we call ‘body’ or ‘matter’. 


1 See Part 1, art. 4. 2 Above, Part 1, art. 29. 


223 


40 


41 


42 


224 Principles of Philosophy 


2. The basis for our knowledge that the human body is closely conjoined 
with the mind. 

By the same token, the conclusion that there is a particular body that is 
more closely conjoined with our mind than any other body follows from 
our clear awareness that pain and other sensations come to us quite 
unexpectedly. The mind is aware that these sensations do not come from 
itself alone, and that they cannot belong to it simply in virtue of its being 
a thinking thing; instead, they can belong to it only in virtue of its being 
joined to something other than itself which is extended and moveable — 
namely what we call the human body. But this is not the place for a 
detailed explanation of its nature. 


3. Sensory perception does not show us what really exists in things, but 
merely shows us what is beneficial or harmful to man’s composite 
nature. 

It will be enough, for the present, to note that sensory perceptions are 
related exclusively to this combination of the human body and mind. 
They normally tell us of the benefit or harm that external bodies may do 
to this combination, and do not, except occasionally and accidentally, 
show us what external bodies are like in themselves. If we bear this in 
mind we will easily lay aside the preconceived opinions acquired from the 
senses, and in this connection make use of the intellect alone, carefully 
attending to the ideas implanted in it by nature. 


4. The nature of body consists not in weight, hardness, colour, or the 
like, but simply in extension. 

If we do this, we shall perceive that the nature of matter, or body 
considered in general, consists not in its being something which is hard or 
heavy or coloured, or which affects the senses in any way, but simply in 
its being something which is extended in length, breadth and depth. For 
as regards hardness, our sensation tells us no more than that the parts of 
a hard body resist the motion of our hands when they come into contact 
with them. If, whenever our hands moved in a given direction, all the 
bodies in that area were to move away at the same speed as that of our 
approaching hands, we should never have any sensation of hardness. 
And since it is quite unintelligible to suppose that, if bodies did move 
away in this fashion, they would thereby lose their bodily nature, it 
follows that this nature cannot consist in hardness. By the same 
reasoning it can be shown that weight, colour, and all other such 
qualities that are perceived by the senses as being in corporeal matter, can 
be removed from it, while the matter itself remains intact; it thus follows 
that its nature does not depend on any of these qualities. 


Part Two 225 


5. This truth about the nature of body is obscured by preconceived 
Opinions concerning rarefaction and empty space. 

But there are still two possible reasons for doubting that the true nature 
of body consists solely in extension. The first is the widespread belief that 
many bodies can be rarefied and condensed in such a way that when 
rarefied they possess more extension than when condensed. Indeed, the 
subtlety of some people goes so far that they distinguish the substance of 
a body from its quantity, and even its quantity from its extension.' The 
second reason is that if we understand there to be nothing in a given place 
but extension in length, breadth and depth, we generally say not that 
there is a body there, but simply that there is a space, or even an empty 
space; and almost everyone is convinced that this amounts to nothing at 


all. 


6. How rarefaction occurs. 

But with regard to rarefaction and condensation, anyone who attends to 
his own thoughts, and is willing to admit only what he clearly perceives, 
will not suppose that anything happens in these processes beyond a 
change of shape. Rarefied bodies, that is to say, are those which have 
many gaps between their parts — gaps which are occupied by other 
bodies; and they become denser simply in virtue of the parts coming 
together and reducing or completely closing the gaps. In this last 
eventuality a body becomes so dense that it would be a contradiction to 
suppose that it could be made any denser. Now in this condition, the 
extension of a body is no less than when it occupies more space in virtue 
of the mutual separation of its parts; for whatever extension is comprised 
in the pores or gaps left between the parts must be attributed not to the 
body itself but to the various other bodies which fill the gaps. In just the 
same way, when we see a sponge filled with water or some other liquid, 
we do not suppose that in terms of its own individual parts it has a 
greater extension than when it is squeezed dry; we simply suppose that its 
pores are open wider, so that it spreads over a greater space. 


7. This ts the only intelligible way of explaining rarefaction. 

I really do not see what has prompted others to say that rarefaction 
occurs through an increase of quantity, in preference to explaining it by 
means of this example of the sponge.’ It is true that when air or water 1s 
rarefied, we do not see any pores being made larger, or any new body 


1 Cf. The World, above p. 92. 

2 Scholastic philosophers explained rarefaction in terms of a given amount of matter 
occupying a larger quantity or volume of space: for Descartes, however, this is 
unintelligible, since there is no real distinction between the notions of ‘quantity’, ‘matter’ 
and ‘space’. See below, art. 8-12. 


43 


44 


45 


226 Principles of Philosophy 


coming to fill them up. But to invent something unintelligible so as to 
provide a purely verbal explanation of rarefaction is surely less rational 
than inferring the existence of pores or gaps which are made larger, and 
supposing that some new body comes and fills them. Admittedly, we do 
not perceive this new body with any of our senses; but there is no 
compelling reason to believe that all the bodies which exist must affect 
our senses. Moreover, it is very easy for us to see how rarefaction can 
occur in this way, but we cannot see how it could occur in any other way. 
Finally, it is a complete contradiction to suppose that something should 
be augmented by new quantity or new extension without new extended 
substance, i.e. a new body, being added to it at the same time. For any 
addition of extension or quantity is unintelligible without the addition of 
substance which has quantity and extension. This will become clearer 
from what follows. 


8. The distinction between quantity or number and the thing that has 
quantity or number is merely a conceptual distinction. 

There is no real difference between quantity and the extended substance; 
the difference is merely a conceptual one, like that between number and 
the thing which is numbered. We can, for example, consider the entire 
nature of the corporeal substance which occupies a space of ten feet 
without attending to the specific measurement; for we understand this 
nature to be exactly the same in any part of the space as in the whole 
space. And, conversely, we can think of the number ten, or the 
continuous quantity ten feet, without attending to this determinate 
substance. For the concept of the number ten is exactly the same 
irrespective of whether it is referred to this measurement of ten feet or to 
anything else; and as for the continuous quantity ten feet, although this is 
unintelligible without some extended substance of which it is the 
quantity, it can be understood apart from this determinate substance. In 
reality, however, it is impossible to take even the smallest fraction from 
the quantity or extension without also removing just as much from the 
substance; and conversely, it is impossible to remove the smallest amount 
from the substance without taking away just as much from the quantity 
or extension. 


9. If corporeal substance is distinguished from its quantity, it ts 
conceived in a confused manner as something incorporeal. 

Others may disagree, but I do not think they have any alternative 

perception of the matter. When they make a distinction between 

substance and extension or quantity, either they do not understand 

anything by the term ‘substance’, or else they simply have a confused idea 


Part Two 22:7 


of incorporeal substance, which they falsely attach to corporeal 
substance; and they relegate the true idea of corporeal substance to the 
category of extension, which, however, they term an accident. There is 
thus no correspondence between their verbal expressions and what they 
grasp in their minds. 


10. What is meant by ‘space’, or ‘internal place’. 

There is no real distinction between space, or internal place,! and the 
corporeal substance contained in it; the only difference lies in the way in 
which we are accustomed to conceive of them. For in reality the 
extension in length, breadth and depth which constitutes a space is 
exactly the same as that which constitutes a body. The difference arises as 
follows: in the case of a body, we regard the extension as something 
particular, and thus think of it as changing whenever there is a new body; 
but in the case of a space, we attribute to the extension only a generic 
unity, so that when a new body comes to occupy the space, the extension 
of the space is reckoned not to change but to remain one and the same, so 
long as it retains the same size and shape and keeps the same position 
relative to certain external bodies which we use to determine the space in 
question. 


11. There is no real difference between space and corporeal substance. 
It is easy for us to recognize that the extension constituting the nature of 
a body is exactly the same as that constituting the nature of a space. 
There is no more difference between them than there is between the 
nature of a genus or species and the nature of an individual. Suppose we 
attend to the idea we have of some body, for example a stone, and leave 
out everything we know to be non-essential to the nature of body: we 
will first of all exclude hardness, since if the stone is melted or pulverized 
it will lose its hardness without thereby ceasing to be a body; next we will 
exclude colour, since we have often seen stones so transparent as to lack 
colour; next we will exclude heaviness, since although fire is extremely 
light it is still thought of as being corporeal; and finally we will exclude 
cold and heat and all other such qualities, either because they are not 
thought of as being in the stone, or because if they change, the stone is 
not on that account reckoned to have lost its bodily nature. After all this, 
we will see that nothing remains in the idea of the stone except that it is 
something extended in length, breadth and depth. Yet this is just what is 


1 The scholastics distinguished between locus internus, or ‘internal place’ (the space 
occupied by a body), and locus externus, or ‘external space’ (the external surface 
containing a body). Descartes employs the traditional terminology here and at art. 13 
below, but puts it to his own use. 


46 


47 


228 Principles of Philosophy 


comprised in the idea of a space — not merely a space which is full of 
bodies, but even a space which is called ‘empty’.! 


12. The difference between space and corporeal substance lies in our 
way of conceiving them. 

There is, however, a difference in the way in which we conceive of space 
and corporeal substance. For if a stone is removed from the space or 
place where it is, we think that its extension has also been removed from 
that place, since we regard the extension as something particular and 
inseparable from the stone. But at the same time we think that the 
extension of the place where the stone used to be remains, and is the same 
as before, although the place is now occupied by wood or water or air or 
some other body, or is even supposed to be empty. For we are now 
considering extension as something general, which is thought of as being 
the same, whether it is the extension of a stone or of wood, or of water or 
of air or of any other body — or even of a vacuum, if there is such a thing 
— provided only that it has the same size and shape, and keeps the same 
position relative to the external bodies that determine the space in 
question. 


13. What is meant by ‘external place’. 

The terms ‘place’ and ‘space’, then, do not signify anything different from 
the body which is said to be in a place; they merely refer to its size, shape 
and position relative to other bodies. To determine the position, we have 
to look at various other bodies which we regard as immobile; and in 
relation to different bodies we may say that the same thing is both 
changing and not changing its place at the same time. For example, when 
a ship is under way, a man sitting on the stern remains in one place 
relative to the other parts of the ship with respect to which his position is 
unchanged; but he is constantly changing his place relative to the 
neighbouring shores, since he is constantly receding from one shore and 
approaching another. Then again, if we believe the earth moves,’ and 
suppose that it advances the same distance from west to east as the ship 
travels from east to west in the corresponding period of time, we shall 
again say that the man sitting on the stern is not changing his place; for 
we are now determining the place by means of certain fixed points in the 
heavens. Finally, if we suppose that there are no such genuinely fixed 
points to be found in the universe (a supposition which will be shown 
below to be probable?) we shall conclude that nothing has a permanent 
place, except as determined by our thought. 

1 Lat. vacuum. See below, art. 16. 2 ‘... turns on its axis’ (French version). 


3 The French version has ‘demonstrable’ instead of ‘probable’. Cf. Part 3, art. 29, p. 252 
below. 


Part Two 229 


14. The difference between place and space. 

The difference between the terms ‘place’ and ‘space’ is that the former 
designates more explicitly the position, as opposed to the size or shape, 
while it is the size and shape that we are concentrating on when we talk 
of space. For we often say that one thing leaves a given place and another 
thing arrives there, even though the second thing is not strictly of the 
same size and shape; but in this case we do not say it occupies the same 
space. By contrast, when something alters its position, we always say the 
place is changed, despite the fact that the size and shape remain 
unaltered. When we say that a thing is in a given place, all we mean is 
that it occupies such and such a position relative to other things; but 
when we go on to say that it fills up a given space or place, we mean in 
addition that it has precisely the size and shape of the space in question. 


15. How external place is rightly taken to be the surface of the 
surrounding body. 

Thus we always take a space to be an extension in length, breadth and 
depth. But with regard to place, we sometimes consider it as internal to 
the thing which is in the place in question, and sometimes as external to 
it. Now internal place is exactly the same as space; but external place 
may be taken as being the surface immediately surrounding what is in the 
place. It should be noted that ‘surface’ here does not mean any part of the 
surrounding body but merely the boundary between the surrounding and 
surrounded bodies, which is no more than a mode. Or rather what is 
meant is simply the common surface, which is not a part of one body 
rather than the other but is always reckoned to be the same, provided it 
keeps the same size and shape. For if there are two bodies, one 
surrounding the other, and the entire surrounding body changes, surface 
and all, the surrounded body is not therefore thought of as changing its 
place, provided that during this time it keeps the same position relative to 
the external bodies which are regarded as immobile. If, for example, we 
suppose that a ship on a river is being pulled equally in one direction by 
the current and in the opposite direction by the wind, so that it does not 
change its position relative to the banks, we will all readily admit that it 
stays in the same place, despite the complete change in the surrounding 
surface. 


16. It is a contradiction to suppose there is such a thing as a vacuum, 

t.e. that in which there is nothing whatsoever. 
The impossibility of a vacuum, in the philosophical sense of that in which 
there is no substance whatsoever, is clear from the fact that there is no 
difference between the extension of a space, or internal place, and the 


48 


49 


59O 


2.30 Principles of Philosophy 


extension of a body. For a body’s being extended in length, breadth and 
depth in itself warrants the conclusion that it is a substance, since it is a 
complete contradiction that a particular extension should belong to 
nothing; and the same conclusion must be drawn with respect to a space 
that is supposed to be a vacuum, namely that since there is extension in it, 
there must necessarily be substance in it as well. 


17. The ordinary use of the term ‘empty’ does not imply the total 
absence of bodies. 

In its ordinary use the term ‘empty’! usually refers not to a place or space 
in which there is absolutely nothing at all, but simply to a place in which 
there is none of the things that we think ought to be there. Thus a pitcher 
made to hold water is called ‘empty’ when it is simply full of air; a 
fishpond is called ‘empty’, despite all the water in it, if it contains no fish; 
and a merchant ship is called ‘empty’ if it is loaded only with sand ballast. 
And similarly a space is called ‘empty’ if it contains nothing perceivable 
by the senses, despite the fact that it is full of created, self-subsistent 
matter; for normally the only things we give any thought to are those 
which are detected by our senses. But if we subsequently fail to keep in 
mind what ought to be understood by the terms ‘empty’ and ‘nothing’, 
we may suppose that a space we call empty contains not just nothing 
perceivable by the senses but nothing whatsoever; that would be just as 
mistaken as thinking that the air in a jug is not a subsistent thing on the 
grounds that a jug is usually said to be empty when it contains nothing 
but air. 


18. How to correct our preconceived opinion regarding an absolute 
vacuum. 

Almost all of us fell into this error in our early childhood. Seeing no 
necessary connection between a vessel and the body contained in it, we 
reckoned there was nothing to stop God, at least, removing the body 
which filled the vessel, and preventing any other body from taking its 
place. But to correct this error we should consider that, although there is 
no connection between a vessel and this or that particular body 
contained in it, there is a very strong and wholly necessary connection 
between the concave shape of the vessel and the extension, taken in its 
general sense, which must be contained in the concave shape. Indeed, it is 
no less contradictory for us to conceive of a mountain without a valley 
than it is for us to think of the concavity apart from the extension 
contained within it, or the extension apart from the substance which is 


1 Lat. vacuum, from vacuus, ‘void’, ‘unoccupied’; cf. art. 18. 


Part Two 231 


extended; for, as I have often said, nothingness cannot possess any 
extension. Hence, if someone asks what would happen if God were to 
take away every single body contained in a vessel, without allowing any 
other body to take the place of what had been removed, the answer must 
be that the sides of the vessel would, in that case, have to be in contact. 
For when there is nothing between two bodies they must necessarily 
touch each other. And it is a manifest contradiction for them to be apart, 
or to have a distance between them, when the distance in question is 
nothing; for every distance is a mode of extension, and therefore cannot 
exist without an extended substance. 


19. The preceding conclusion confirms what we said regarding 
rarefaction. 

We have thus seen that the nature of corporeal substance consists simply 
in its being something extended; and its extension is no different from 
what is normally attributed to space, however ‘empty’. From this we 
readily see that no one part of it can possibly occupy more space at one 
time than at another, and hence that rarefaction cannot occur except in 
the way explained earlier on.! Similarly, there cannot be more matter or 
corporeal substance in a vessel filled with lead or gold or any other body, 
no matter how heavy and hard, than there is when it contains only air 
and is thought of as empty. This is because the quantity of the parts of 
matter does not depend on their heaviness or hardness, but solely on their 
extension, which is always the same for a given vessel. 


20. The foregoing results also demonstrate the impossibility of atoms. 

We also know that it is impossible that there should exist atoms, that is, 
pieces of matter that are by their very nature indivisible <as some 
philosophers have imagined>. For if there were any atoms, then no matter 
how small we imagined them to be, they would necessarily have to be 
extended; and hence we could in our thought divide each of them into 
two or more smaller parts, and hence recognize their divisibility. For 
anything we can divide in our thought must, for that very reason, be 
known to be divisible; so if we were to judge it to be indivisible, our 
judgement would conflict with our knowledge. Even if we imagine that 
God has chosen to bring it about that some particle of matter is incapable 
of being divided into smaller particles, it will still not be correct, strictly 
speaking, to call this particle indivisible. For, by making it indivisible by 
any of his creatures, God certainly could not thereby take away his own 
power of dividing it, since it is quite impossible for him to diminish his 


1 See above, art. 6, p. 225. 


51 


§2 


53 


232 Principles of Philosophy 


own power, as has been noted above.! Hence, strictly speaking, the 
particle will remain divisible, since it is divisible by its very nature. 


21. Similarly, the extension of the world is indefinite. 

What is more we recognize that this world, that is, the whole universe of 
corporeal substance, has no limits to its extension. For no matter where 
we imagine the boundaries to be, there are always some indefinitely 
extended spaces beyond them, which we not only imagine but also 
perceive to be imaginable in a true fashion, that is, real. And it follows 
that these spaces contain corporeal substance which is indefinitely 
extended. For, as has already been shown very fully, the idea of the 
extension which we conceive to be in a given space is exactly the same as 
the idea of corporeal substance. 


22. Similarly, the earth and the heavens are composed of one and the 
same matter; and there cannot be a plurality of worlds. 

It can also easily be gathered from this that celestial matter is no different 
from terrestrial matter.2 And even if there were an infinite number of 
worlds, the matter of which they were composed would have to be 
identical; hence, there cannot in fact be a plurality of worlds, but only 
one. For we very clearly understand that the matter whose nature 
consists simply in its being an extended substance already occupies 
absolutely all the imaginable space in which the alleged additional worlds 
would have to be located; and we cannot find within us an idea of any 
other sort of matter. 


23. All the variety in matter, all the diversity of its forms, depends on 
motion. 

The matter existing in the entire universe is thus one and the same, and it 
is always recognized as matter simply in virtue of its being extended. All 
the properties which we clearly perceive in it are reducible to its 
divisibility and consequent mobility in respect of its parts, and its 
resulting capacity to be affected in all the ways which we perceive as 
being derivable from the movement of the parts. If the division into parts 
occurs simply in our thought, there is no resulting change; any variation 
in matter or diversity in its many forms depends on motion. This seems to 
have been widely recognized by the philosophers, since they have stated 
that nature is the principle of motion and rest. And what they meant by 


1 Cf. Part 1, art. 60, above p. 213. 
2 Descartes here rejects the scholastic doctrine of a radical difference in kind between 
‘sublunary’ or terrestrial phenomena and the incorruptible world of the heavens. 


Part Two 2.33 


‘nature’ in this context is what causes all corporeal things to take on the 
characteristics of which we are aware in experience. 


24. What is meant by ‘motion’ in the ordinary sense of the term. 
Motion, in the ordinary sense of the term, is simply the action by which a 
body travels from one place to another. By ‘motion’, I mean local 
motion; for my thought encompasses no other kind, and hence I do not 
think that any other kind should be imagined to exist in nature.! Now I 
pointed out above that the same thing can be said to be changing and not 
changing its place at the same time;7 and similarly the same thing can be 
said to be moving and not moving. For example, a man sitting on board a 
ship which is leaving port considers himself to be moving relative to the 
shore which he regards as fixed; but he does not think of himself as 
moving relative to the ship, since his position is unchanged relative to its 
parts. Indeed, since we commonly think all motion involves action, while 
rest consists in the cessation of action, the man sitting on deck is more 
properly said to be at rest than in motion, since he does not have any 
sensory awareness of action in himself. 


25. What is meant by ‘motion’ in the strict sense of the term. 

If, on the other hand, we consider what should be understood by motion, 
not in common usage but in accordance with the truth of the matter, and 
if our aim is to assign a determinate nature to it, we may say that motion 
is the transfer of one piece of matter, or one body, from the vicinity of the 
other bodies which are in immediate contact with it, and which are 
regarded as being at rest, to the vicinity of other bodies. By ‘one body’ or 
‘one piece of matter’ | mean whatever is transferred at a given time, even 
though this may in fact consist of many parts which have different 
motions relative to each other. And I say ‘the transfer’ as opposed to the 
force or action which brings about the transfer, to show that motion is 
always in the moving body as opposed to the body which brings about 
the movement. The two are not normally distinguished with sufficient 
care; and I want to make it clear that the motion of something that moves 
is, like the lack of motion in a thing which is at rest, a mere mode of that 
thing and not itself a subsistent thing, just as shape is a mere mode of the 
thing which has shape. 


26. No more action is required for motion than for rest. 
It should be noted that in this connection we are in the grip of a strong 
preconceived opinion, namely the belief that more action is needed for 


1 See note to Part 1, art. 69, p. 217. 2 Above, art. 13, p. 228. 


54 


55 


234 Principles of Philosophy 


motion than for rest. We have been convinced of this since early 
childhood owing to the fact that our bodies move by our will, of which 
we have inner awareness, but remain at rest simply in virtue of sticking to 
the earth by gravity,! the force of which we do not perceive through the 
senses. And because gravity and many other causes of which we are 
unaware produce resistance when we try to move our limbs, and make us 
tired, we think that a greater action or force is needed to initiate a motion 
than to stop it; for we take action to be the effort we expend in moving 
our limbs and moving other bodies by the use of our limbs. We will easily 
get rid of this preconceived opinion if we consider that it takes an effort 
on our part not only to move external bodies, but also, quite often, to 
stop them, when gravity and other causes are insufficient to arrest their 
movement. For example, the action needed to move a boat which is at 
rest in still water is no greater than that needed to stop it suddenly when 
it is moving — or rather it is not much greater, for one must subtract the 
weight of the water displaced by the ship and the viscosity of the water, 
both of which could gradually bring it to a halt. 


27. Motion and rest are merely various modes of a body in motion. 
We are dealing here not with the action which is understood to exist in 
the body which produces or arrests the motion, but simply with the 
transfer of a body, and with the absence of a transfer, i.e. rest. So it is 
clear that this transfer cannot exist outside the body which is in motion, 
and that when there is a transfer of motion, the body is in a different state 
from when there is no transfer, i.e. when it is at rest. Thus motion and 
rest are nothing else but two different modes of a body. 


28. Motion in the strict sense is to be referred solely to the bodies which 
are contiguous with the body in motion. 

In my definition I specified that the transfer occurs from the vicinity of 
contiguous bodies to the vicinity of other bodies; I did not say that there 
was a transfer from one place to another. This is because, as explained 
above,* the term ‘place’ has various meanings, depending on how we 
think of it; but when we understand motion as a transfer occurring from 
the vicinity of contiguous bodies, then, given that only one set of bodies 


1 Lat. gravitas, literally ‘heaviness’. In scholastic physics this term was used to refer to the 
supposed inherent tendency of terrestrial bodies to downward motion. For Descartes’ 
own use of the term, and his purely mechanistic explanation of heaviness, see below Part 
4, art. 20-3. It should be remembered that neither for the scholastics nor for Descartes 
did the term ‘gravity’ have its modern (post-Newtonian) connotation of a universal 
attractive force. 

2 See above, Part 2, art. 10, p. 227. 


Part Two 235 


can be contiguous with the same moving body at any one time, we 
cannot assign several simultaneous motions to this body, but only one. 


29. And it is to be referred only to those contiguous bodies which are 
regarded as being at rest. 

I further specified that the transfer occurs from the vicinity not of any 
contiguous bodies but from the vicinity of those which ‘are regarded as 
being at rest’. For transfer is in itself a reciprocal process: we cannot 
understand that a body AB is transferred from the vicinity of a body CD 
without simultaneously understanding that CD is transferred from the 
vicinity of AB. Exactly the same force and action is needed on both sides. 
So if we wished to characterize motion strictly in terms of its own nature, 
without reference to anything else, then in the case of two contiguous 
bodies being transferred in opposite directions, and thus separated, we 
should say that there was just as much motion in the one body as in the 
other. But this would clash too much with our ordinary way of speaking. 
For we are used to standing on the earth and regarding it as at rest; so 
although we may see some of its parts, which are contiguous with other 
smaller bodies, being transferred out of their vicinity, we do not for that 
reason think of the earth itself as in motion. 


30. Why, if there are two contiguous bodies which are separated from 
each other, motion ts attributed to one of them rather than the other. 
The principal reason for this is that motion is understood to belong to the 
whole body in motion. Now it cannot be understood to belong to the 
whole earth, in virtue of the transfer of some of its parts from the vicinity 
of smaller contiguous bodies; for often we may observe several such 
transfers occurring on the earth in opposite directions. Let the body 
EFGH be the earth [see Fig. 1], and suppose that on its surface the body 
AB is transferred from E towards F, and simultaneously the body CD is 
transferred from H to G. Now this very fact means that the parts of the 
earth contiguous with AB are transferred from B towards A; and to 


- 
a 


E TATBa* 


. 
* 


CUD I 


Fig. 1 


56 


57 


58 


2.36 Principles of Philosophy 


produce this transfer, the action in these parts must be just as great as 
that in the body AB, and must be of an identical nature. But for all that, 
we do not understand the earth to be in motion from B towards A, or 
from east to west;! for, if so, the fact that those of its parts which are 
contiguous with the body CD are being transferred from C to D would, 
by the same reasoning, require us to understand the earth to be moving in 
the other direction, from west to east — which contradicts the former 
supposition. Hence, to avoid too great a departure from the ordinary 
way of speaking, we shall say in this case not that the earth moves, but 
merely that the bodies AB and CD move; and similarly in other cases. But 
meanwhile we will remember that whatever is real and positive in 
moving bodies — that in virtue of which they are said to move — is also to 
be found in the other bodies which are contiguous with them, even 
though these are regarded merely as being at rest. 


31. How there may be countless different motions in the same body. 
Each body has only one proper motion, since it is understood to be 
moving away from only one set of bodies, which are contiguous with it 
and at rest. But it can also share in countless other motions, namely in 
cases where it is a part of other bodies which have other motions. For 
example, if someone walking on board ship has a watch in his pocket, the 
wheels of the watch have only one proper motion, but they also share in 
another motion because they are in contact with the man who is taking 
his walk, and they and he form a single piece of matter. They also share 
in an additional motion through being in contact with the ship tossing on 
the waves; they share in a further motion through contact with the sea 
itself; and lastly, they share in yet another motion through contact with 
the whole earth, if indeed the whole earth is in motion. Now all the 
motions will really exist in the wheels of the watch, but it is not easy to 
have an understanding of so many motions all at once, nor can we have 
knowledge of all of them. So it is enough to confine our attention to that 
single motion which is the proper motion of each body. 


32. How even the proper motion unique to each body may be 
considered as a plurality of motions. 

The single motion that is the proper motion of each body may also be 

considered as if it were made up of several motions. For example, we may 

distinguish two different motions in a carriage wheel — a circular motion 

about the axle and a rectilinear motion along the line of the road. But 


1 The original texts (both Latin and French) have the terms ‘east’ and ‘west’ transposed 
throughout this article. The corrections adopted here and three lines lower down seem 
necessary to make sense of the diagram. 


Part Two 2.37 


that these are not really distinct is clear from the fact that every single 
point on the moving object describes only one line. It does not matter 
that the line is often very twisted so that it seems to have been produced 
by many different motions; for we can imagine any line at all — even a 
straight line, which is the simplest of all — as arising from an infinite 
number of different motions. Thus if the line AB travels towards CD [see 
Fig. 2], and at the same time the point A travels towards B, the straight 


A B 


Fig. 2 


line AD described by the point A will depend on two rectilinear motions, 
from A to B and from AB to CD, in just the same way as the curve 
described by any point of the wheel depends on a rectilinear motion and 
a circular motion. Although it is often useful to separate a single motion 
into several components in this way in order to facilitate our perception 
of it, nevertheless, absolutely speaking, there is only one motion that 
should be counted for any given body. 


33. How in every case of motion there is a complete circle of bodies 
moving together. 

I noted above! that every place is full of bodies, and that the same portion 
of matter always takes up the same amount of space, <so that it is 
impossible for it to fill a greater or lesser space, or for any other body to 
occupy its place while it remains there>. It follows from this that each 
body can move only in a <complete> circle <of matter, or ring of bodies 
which all move together at the same time>: a body entering a given place 
expels another, and the expelled body moves on and expels another, and 
so on, until the body at the end of the sequence enters the place left by the 


1 Art. 18 and 19, pp. 230f. 


59 


238 Principles of Philosophy 


first body at the precise moment when the first body is leaving it. We can 
easily understand this in the case of a perfect circle, since we see that no 
vacuum and no rarefaction or condensation is needed to enable part A 
of the circle [see Fig. 3] to move towards B, provided that B simultaneously 
moves towards C, C towards D and D towards A. But the same thing is 
intelligible even in the case of an imperfect circle however irregular it may 
be, provided we notice how all the variations in the spaces can be 
compensated for by variations in speed. Thus all the matter contained 
in the space EFGH [see Fig. 4] can move in a circle without the need for 


=. 


EE 


Fig. 4 


any condensation or vacuum, and the part that is around E can move 
towards G while the part that is around G simultaneously moves towards 
E, with this sole proviso: if the space in G is supposed to be four times as 
wide as the space at E and twice as wide as the space at F and H, then the 
speed of the motion at E must be four times greater than that at G and 


Part Two 239 


twice as great as that at F or H; and at every other location an increase in 
speed must similarly compensate for a narrower space. In this way, the 
amount of matter passing through any given part of the circle in any 
given time will always be equal. 


34. From this it follows that the number of particles into which matter ts 
divided is in fact indefinite, although it is beyond our power to grasp 
them alll. 

It must, however, be admitted that in the case of this motion we come 
upon something the truth of which our mind perceives, while at the same 
time being unable to grasp exactly how it occurs. For what happens is an 
infinite, or indefinite,’ division of the various particles of matter; and the 
resulting subdivisions are so numerous that however small we make a 
particle in our thought, we always understand that it is in fact divided 
into other still smaller particles. For it is impossible for the matter which 
now fills space G successively to fill all the spaces between G and E, 
which get gradually smaller by countless stages, unless some part of that 
matter adjusts its shape to the innumerable different volumes of those 
spaces. And for this to come about, it is necessary that all its imaginable 
particles, which are in fact innumerable, should shift their relative 
positions to some tiny extent. This minute shifting of position is a true 
case of division. 


35. How this division comes about; and the fact that it undoubtedly 
takes place, even though it is beyond our grasp. 

It should be noted, however, that I am not here speaking of the whole of 
this matter, but merely of some part of it. We may suppose that two or 
three of its parts at G are as wide as the space at E, and that there are also 
several smaller parts which remain undivided; but nevertheless we can 
still understand them to move in a circle towards E, provided they have 
mixed up with them various other particles which somehow bend and 
change shape in such a way as to join onto them. Now the former group 
do not change their own shape, but merely adapt their speed depending 
on the place they are to occupy, while the latter group exactly fill all the 
crevices which the former do not occupy. We cannot grasp in our 
thought how this indefinite division comes about, but we should not 
therefore doubt that it occurs. For we clearly perceive that it necessarily 
follows from what we <already> know most evidently of the nature of 
matter, and we perceive that it belongs to the class of things which are 
beyond the grasp of our finite minds. 


1 See above, Part 1, art. 26, pp. 2orf. 


60 


61 


62 


240 Principles of Philosophy 


36. God ts the primary cause of motion; and he always preserves the 
same quantity of motion in the universe. 

After this consideration of the nature of motion, we must look at its 
cause. This is in fact twofold: first, there is the universal and primary 
cause — the general cause of all the motions in the world; and second 
there is the particular cause which produces in an individual piece of 
matter some motion which it previously lacked. Now as far as the 
general cause is concerned, it seems clear to me that this is no other than 
God himself. In the beginning <in his omnipotence> he created matter, 
along with its motion and rest; and now, merely by his regular 
concurrence, he preserves the same amount of motion and rest in the 
material universe as he put there in the beginning. Admittedly motion is 
simply a mode of the matter which is moved. But nevertheless it has a 
certain determinate quantity; and this, we easily understand, may be 
constant in the universe as a whole while varying in any given part. Thus 
if one part of matter moves twice as fast as another which is twice as 
large, we must consider that there is the same quantity of motion in each 
part; and if one part slows down, we must suppose that some other part 
of equal size speeds up by the same amount. For we understand that 
God’s perfection involves not only his being immutable in himself, but 
also his operating in a manner that is always utterly constant and 
immutable. Now there are some changes whose occurrence is guaranteed 
either by our own plain experience or by divine revelation, and either our 
perception or our faith shows us that these take place without any change 
in the creator; but apart from these we should not suppose that any other 
changes occur in God’s works, in case this suggests some inconstancy in 
God. Thus, God imparted various motions to the parts of matter when he 
first created them, and he now preserves all this matter in the same way, 
and by the same process by which he originally created it;' and it follows 
from what we have said that this fact alone makes it most reasonable to 
think that God likewise always preserves the same quantity of motion in 
matter. 


37. The first law of nature: each and every thing, in so far as it can, 
always continues in the same state; and thus what is once in motion 
always continues to move. 

From God’s immutability we can also know certain rules or laws of 

nature, which are the secondary and particular causes of the various 

motions we see in particular bodies. The first of these laws is that each 


1 There is for Descartes no real distinction between God’s action in creating the universe 
and his action in preserving it or maintaining it in existence. See below, art. 42, p. 243, 
and Med. 11: vol. 1, p. 33. 


Part Two 241 


thing, in so far as it is simple and undivided, always remains in the same 
state, as far as it can, and never changes except as a result of external 
causes. Thus, if a particular piece of matter is square, we can be sure 
without more ado that it will remain square for ever, unless something 
coming from outside changes its shape. If it is at rest, we hold that it will 
never begin to move unless it is pushed into motion by some cause. And if 
it moves, there is equally no reason for thinking it will ever lose this 
motion of its own accord and without being checked by something 
else. Hence we must conclude that what is in motion always, so far as it 
can, continues to move. But we live on the Earth, whose composition is 
such that all motions occurring near it are soon halted, often by causes 
undetectable by our senses. Hence from our earliest years we have often 
judged that such motions, which are in fact stopped by causes unknown 
to us, come to an end of their own accord. And we tend to believe that 
what we have apparently experienced in many cases holds good in all 
cases — namely that it is in the very nature of motion to come to an end, 
or to tend towards a state of rest. This, of course, <is a false preconceived 
opinion which> is utterly at variance with the laws of nature; for rest is 
the opposite of motion, and nothing can by its own nature tend towards 
its opposite, or towards its own destruction. 


38. The motion of projectiles. 

Indeed, our everyday experience of projectiles completely confirms this 
first rule of ours. For there is no other reason why a projectile should 
persist in motion for some time after it leaves the hand that throws it, 
except that what is once in motion continues to move until it is slowed 
down by bodies that are in the way.' And it is clear that projectiles are 
normally slowed down, little by little, by the air or other fluid bodies in 
which they are moving, and that this is why their motion cannot persist 
for long. The fact that air offers resistance to other moving bodies may be 
confirmed either by our own experience, through the sense of touch if we 
beat the air with a fan, or by the flight of birds. And in the case of any 
other fluid, the resistance offered to the motion of a projectile is even 
more obvious than in the case of air. 


39. The second law of nature: all motion is in itself rectilinear; and 
hence any body moving in a circle always tends to move away from 
the centre of the circle which it describes. 

The second law is that every piece of matter, considered in itself, always 

tends to continue moving, not in any oblique path but only in a straight 


1 Cf. The World, ch. 7: above p. 95. 


63 


64 


242 Principles of Philosophy 


line. This is true despite the fact that many particles are often forcibly 
deflected by the impact of other bodies; and, as I have said above,' in any 
motion the result of all the matter moving simultaneously is a kind of 
circle. The reason for this second rule is the same as the reason for the 
first rule, namely the immutability and simplicity of the operation by 
which God preserves motion in matter. For he always preserves the 
motion in the precise form in which it is occurring at the very moment 
when he preserves it, without taking any account of the motion which 
was occurring a little while earlier. It is true that no motion takes place in 
a single instant of time; but clearly whatever is in motion is determined, 
at the individual instants which can be specified as long as the motion 
lasts, to continue moving in a given direction along a straight line, and 
never in a curve...? 


40. The third law: if a body collides with another body that ts 
stronger than itself, it loses none of its motion; but if it collides with 
a weaker body, it loses a quantity of motion equal to that which it 
imparts to the other body. 
The third law of nature is this: when a moving body collides with 
another, if its power of continuing in a straight line is less than the 
resistance of the other body, it is deflected so that, while the quantity of 
motion is retained, the direction is altered; but if its power of continuing 
is greater than the resistance of the other body, it carries that body along 
with it, and loses a quantity of motion equal to that which it imparts to 
the other body. Thus we find that when hard projectiles strike some other 
hard body, they do not stop, but rebound in the opposite direction; when, 
by contrast, they encounter a soft body, they are immediately halted 
because they readily transfer all their motion to it. All the particular 
causes of the changes which bodies undergo are covered by this third law 
— or at least the law covers all changes which are themselves corporeal. | 
am not here inquiring into the existence or nature of any power to move 
bodies which may be possessed by human minds, or the minds of angels, 
since I am reserving this topic for a treatise On Man <which I hope to 
produce>.° 


41. The proof of the first part of this rule. 
The first part of this law is proved by the fact that there is a difference 
between motion considered in itself <the motion of a thing> and its 


1 Art. 33, p. 237. 

2 Descartes proceeds to illustrate the point by the example of a stone shot from a sling. Cf. 
Part 3, art. §7, p. 259. 

3 This treatise, originally planned to form Part 6 of the Principles (see below Part 4, art. 
188, p. 279, was never written. It is not to be confused with the earlier Treatise on Man 
(pp. 99-108 above). 


Part Two 2.43 


determination in a certain direction; for the determination of the 
direction can be altered, while the motion remains constant. As I have 
said above, everything that is not composite but simple, as motion is, 
always persists in being <as it is in itself and not in relation to other 
things>, so long as it is not destroyed by an external cause <by meeting 
another object>. Now if one body collides with a second, hard body <in 
its path which it is quite incapable of pushing>, there is an obvious 
reason why its motion should not remain fixed in the same direction, 
<namely the resistance of the body which deflects its path>; but there is 
no reason why its motion should be stopped or diminished, <since it is 
not removed by the other body or by any other cause, and> since one 
motion is not the opposite of another motion. Hence it follows that the 
motion in question ought not to diminish at all. 


42. The proof of the second part of this rule. 

The second part of the law is proved from the immutability of the 
workings of God, by means of which the world is continually preserved 
through an action identical with its original act of creation. For the whole 
of space is filled with bodies, and the motion of every single body is 
rectilinear in tendency; hence it is clear that when he created the world in 
the beginning God did not only impart various motions to different parts 
of the world, but also produced all the reciprocal impulses and transfers 
of motion between the parts. Thus, since God preserves the world by the 
selfsame action and in accordance with the selfsame laws as when he 
created it, the motion which he preserves is not something permanently 
fixed in given pieces of matter, but something which is mutually 
transferred when collisions occur. The very fact that creation is in a 
continual state of change is thus evidence of the immutability of 


God. ! 


43. The nature of the power which all bodies have to act on, or resist, 
other bodies. 

In this connection we must be careful to note what it is that constitutes 
the power of any given body to act on, or resist the action of, another 
body. This power consists simply in the fact that everything tends, so far 
as it can, to persist in the same state, as laid down in our first law. Thus 
what is joined to another thing has some power of resisting separation 
from it; and what is separated has some power of remaining separate. 
Again, what is at rest has some power of remaining at rest and 
consequently of resisting anything that may alter the state of rest; and 


I *... 1S no way incompatible with the immutability of God, and may even serve as 
evidence to establish it’ (French version). 


66 


67 


244 Principles of Philosophy 


what is in motion has some power of persisting in its motion, i.e. of 
continuing to move with the same speed and in the same direction. An 
estimate of this last power must depend firstly on the size of the body 
in question and the size of the surface which separates it from other 
bodies, and secondly on the speed of the motion, and on the various ways 
in which different bodies collide, and the degree of opposition involved. 


44. The opposite of motion is not some other motion but a state of rest; 
and the opposite of the determination of a motion in a given 
direction is its determination in the opposite direction. 

It should be noted that one motion is in no way contrary to another of 

equal speed. Strictly speaking there are only two sorts of opposition to be 

found here. One is the opposition between motion and rest, together with 
the opposition between swiftness and slowness of motion (in so far, that 
is, as such slowness shares something of the nature of rest). And the 

second sort is the opposition between the determination of motion in a 

given direction and an encounter somewhere in that direction with 

another body which is at rest or moving in another direction. The degree 
of this opposition varies in accordance with the direction in which a body 
is moving when it collides with another. 


45. How to determine how much the motion of a given body is altered 
by collision with other bodies. This is calculated by means of the 
following rules. 

To enable us to determine, in the light of this, how individual bodies 

increase or diminish their motions or change direction as a result of 

collision with other bodies, all that is necessary is to calculate the power 
of any given body to produce or resist motion; we also need to lay it 
down as a firm principle that the stronger power always produces its 
effects. Our calculation would be easy if there were only two bodies 
colliding, and these were perfectly hard, and so isolated from all other 
bodies that no surrounding bodies impeded or augmented their motions. 
In this case they would obey the rules that follow.! 


1 Descartes’ seven rules for calculating the speed and direction of bodies after impact cover 
seven ideal cases, which are, respectively: (1) where two bodies of equal size and speed 
collide head on; (2) as in case (1), but where one body is larger; (3) as in (1) but where 
one body is travelling faster; (4) where one body is at rest and larger; (5) where one body 
is at rest and smaller; (6) where one body is at rest and the bodies are equal in size; and 
(7) where two bodies collide when travelling in the same direction. The calculations in all 
seven rules presuppose that ‘quantity of motion’, measured as the product of size 
(extension) and speed, is preserved. For an English version of these articles, and other 
material omitted below, see V. R. and R. P. Miller, Descartes, Principles of philosophy 
(Dordrecht: Reidel, 1983), pp. 64f. 


Part Two 245 
46. The first rule. 
47. The second rule. 


48. The third rule. 


49. The fourth rule. 
50. The fifth rule. 
51. The sixth rule. 


52. The seventh rule. 

... These matters do not need proof since they are self-evident <the 
demonstrations are so certain that even if our experience seemed to show 
us the opposite, we should still be obliged to have more faith in our 
reason than in our senses>. 


53. The application of these rules is difficult because each body is 
simultaneously in contact with many others. 

<In fact it often happens that experience may appear to conflict with the 
rules I have just explained, but the reason for this is evident.> Since no 
bodies in the universe can be so isolated from all others, and no bodies in 
our vicinity are normally perfectly hard, the calculation for determining 
how much the motion of a given body is altered by collision with another 
body is much more difficult than those given above. <So in order to 
judge whether the above rules are observed here or not, it is not sufficient 
to know how two bodies can act against one another on impact.> 
We have to take into account all the other bodies which are touching 
them on every side, and these have very different effects depending on 
whether they are hard or fluid. So we must now inquire what this 
difference consists in. 


54. What hard bodies are, and what fluid bodies are. 

... If we go on to inquire how it comes about that some bodies readily 
abandon their place to other bodies, while others do not, we can easily 
see that a body already in motion does not prevent another body 
occupying the place which it is spontaneously leaving; a body at rest, on 
the other hand, cannot be expelled from its place except by some force 
<coming from outside, which produces a change>. Hence we may infer 
that fluids are bodies made up of numerous tiny particles which are 
agitated by a variety of mutually distinct motions; while hard bodies are 
those whose particles are all at rest relative to each other. 


(70) 


71 


246 Principles of Philosophy 


55. There is no glue binding together the parts of hard bodies apart from 
the simple fact that they are at rest <relative to each other>. 
We certainly cannot think up any kind of glue which could fix together 
the particles of two bodies any more firmly than is achieved simply by 
their being at rest. For what could such a glue be? It could not be a 
substance, for since the particles are themselves substances, there is no 
reason why another substance should join them more effectively than 
they join themselves together. Nor could the ‘glue’ be any mode distinct 
from their being at rest. For what mode could be more contrary to the 
motion that separates them than their being at rest? And we recognize no 
other categories of things apart from substances and their modes. 


56. The particles of fluid bodies move with equal force in all directions. 
And if a hard body is present in a fluid, the smallest force is able to 
set it in motion. 

As far as fluids are concerned, even though we cannot observe through 
our senses any motion of their particles, because they are too small, such 
motion is easily inferred from their effects, especially in the case of air 
and water. For air and water corrupt many other bodies; and no 
corporeal action — and corruption is such an action — can occur without 
local motion ... 


57. The proof of the above. 


58. If any particles of a fluid move more slowly than a hard body which 
is present inside it, the fluid in that area does not behave as a fluid. 


59. If a hard body is pushed by another hard body, it does not get all its 
motion from it; it also gets some of its motion from the surrounding 


fluid. 


60. However, it cannot acquire a greater speed from the fluid than it 
acquires from the hard body that strikes it. 


61. When an entire fluid body moves in a given direction at one time it 
necessarily carries with it any hard body which may be contained 
inside it. 


62. The fact that a hard body is carried along by a fluid in this way does 
not mean that it ts itself in motion. 


63. Why some bodies are so hard that, despite their small size, they 
cannot easily be divided by our hands. 


Part Two 2.47 


64. The only principles which I accept, or require, in physics are those of 
geometry and pure mathematics; these principles explain all natural 
phenomena, and enable us to provide quite certain demonstrations 
regarding them. 

I will not here add anything about shapes or about the countless different 

kinds of motions that can be derived from the infinite variety of different 

shapes. These matters will be quite clear in themselves when the time 
comes for me to deal with them. I am assuming that my readers know the 
basic elements of geometry already, or have sufficient mental aptitude to 
understand mathematical demonstrations. For I freely acknowledge that 

I recognize no matter in corporeal things apart from that which the 

geometers call quantity, and take as the object of their demonstrations, 

i.e. that to which every kind of division, shape and motion is applicable. 

Moreoever, my consideration of such matter involves absolutely nothing 

apart from these divisions, shapes and motions; and even with regard to 

these, I will admit as true only what has been deduced from indubitable 

common notions so evidently that it is fit to be considered as a 

mathematical demonstration. And since all natural phenomena can be 

explained in this way, as will become clear in what follows, I do not think 
that any other principles are either admissible or desirable in physics. 


79 


80 


SI 


PART THREE 


The Visible Universe 


1. We cannot over-estimate the vastness of the works of God. 

The various principles of material things that we have so far discovered 
have been derived not from the preconceived opinions of the senses, but 
from the light of reason, so that we cannot doubt their truth. Our next 
task is to examine whether these principles alone enable us to explain all 
natural phenomena <i.e. the effects which we perceive by means of our 
senses>. Let us begin with the phenomena which are most universal — 
those on which all the others depend; that is to say, let us start with the 
general structure of the entire visible world. In order to philosophize 
correctly about this, two points must be noted to begin with. The first is 
that we must bear in mind the infinite power and goodness of God, and 
not be afraid that our imagination may over-estimate the vastness, 
beauty and perfection of his works. On the contrary, we must beware of 
positing limits here, when we have no certain knowledge of any, on pain 
of appearing to have an insufficient appreciation of the magnificence of 
God’s creative power. 


2. We must beware of being so presumptuous as to think we understand 

the ends which God set before himself in creating the world. 
The second point is that <we must always remember that our mental 
capacity is very mediocre, and> we must beware of having too high an 
opinion of ourselves. We should be doing this if we chose to assign limits 
to the world in the absence of knowledge based on reason or divine 
revelation — as if our powers of thought could stretch beyond what God 
has actually made. And it would be the height of presumption if we were 
to imagine that all things were created by God for our benefit alone, or 
even to suppose that the power of our minds can grasp the ends which he 
set before himself in creating the universe. 


3. The sense in which it may be said that all things were created for man. 
In ethics it may admittedly be an act of piety to assert that God made 
everything for our benefit, since this may impel us all the more to give 
him thanks and burn with love for him. Indeed the assertion is in a sense 


248 


Part Three 249 


true, since we can make some use of all things, if only by exercising our 
minds in contemplating them, and thus adoring God for his marvellous 
works. But nevertheless it is wholly improbable that all things were in 
fact made for our benefit, in the sense that they have no other use. And in 
the study of physics such a supposition would be utterly ridiculous and 
inept, since there is no doubt that many things exist, or once existed, 
though they are now here no longer, which have never been seen or 
thought of by any man, and have never been of any use to anyone. 


4. Experiential phenomena and their use in philosophy. 

The principles which we have so far discovered are so vast and so fertile, 
that their consequences are far more numerous than the entire observed 
contents of the visible world; indeed, they are so numerous that we could 
never <in a lifetime> make a complete survey of them even in our thought. 
But I shall now put forward for scrutiny a brief account of the principal 
phenomena of nature whose causes we must now examine. Our purpose 
is not to use these phenomena as the basis for proving anything, for we 
aim to deduce an account of effects from their causes, not to deduce an 
account of causes from their effects. The intention is simply to direct our 82 
mind to a consideration of some effects rather than others from among 
the countless effects which we take to be producible from the selfsame 
causes. 


5. The ratio between the distances and sizes of the sun, earth and moon. 
6. The distances of the remaining planets from the sun. 
7. It is impossible to over-estimate the remoteness of the fixed stars. 


8. If the earth were viewed from the heavens it would appear simply as 
a planet, smaller than Jupiter or Saturn. 


9. The sun and the fixed stars shine by their own light. (83) 


10. The light of the moon and the other planets is borrowed from the 
sun. 


11. There is no difference, with respect to light, between the earth and (84) 
the planets. 


12. The moon, when it is new, ts illuminated by the earth. 


85 


250 Principles of Philosophy 


13. The sun can be counted as one of the fixed stars, and the earth as one 
of the planets. 


14. The fixed stars always keep the same distance between each other; 
but this is not true of the planets. 


15. The observed motions of the planets may be explained by various 
hypotheses. 

When a sailor on the high seas in calm weather looks out from his own 
ship and sees other ships a long way off changing their mutual positions, 
he can often be in doubt whether the motion responsible for this change 
of position should be attributed to this or that ship, or even to his own. In 
the same way, the paths of the planets, when seen from the earth, are of a 
kind which makes it impossible for us to know, simply on the basis of the 
observed motions, what proper motions should be attributed to any 
given body. And since their paths are very uneven and are. very 
complicated, it is not easy to explain them except by selecting one 
pattern, among all those which can make their movements intelligible, 
and supposing the movements to occur in accordance with it. To this 
end, astronomers have produced three different hypotheses, i.e. supposi- 
tions, which are regarded not as being true, but merely as being suitable 
for explaining the appearances. 


16. Ptolemy’s hypothesis does not account for the appearances. 

The first of these hypotheses is that of Ptolemy. Since this is in conflict 
with many observations <made recently> (especially the waxing and 
waning phases of light which are observed on Venus just as they are on 
the moon),! it is now commonly rejected by all philosophers, and hence | 
will here pass over it. 


17. There is no difference between the hypotheses of Copernicus and 
Tycho, if they are considered simply as hypotheses. 

The second hypothesis is that of Copernicus and the third that of Tycho 

Brahe. These two, considered simply as hypotheses, account for the 

appearances in the same manner and do not differ greatly, except that the 

Copernican version is a little simpler and clearer.” Indeed, Tycho would 


1 The discovery, by telescopic observation, of the phases of Venus was first announced by 
Galileo in 1610; it was an insuperable problem for the traditional Ptolemaic model of the 
solar system, which placed the earth at the centre. 

2 Nicolas Copernicus (1478-1543) proposed that the planets, including the earth, moved 
in circular orbits around the sun; Tycho Brahe (1546-1601) had the sun revolving 
around a central earth, but the other planets revolving around the sun. 


Part Three 251 


have had no occasion to change it, had he not been attempting to unfold 
the actual truth of things, as opposed to a mere hypothesis. 


18. Tycho attributes less motion to the earth than Copernicus, if we 
go by what he actually says, but in reality he attributes more 
motion to 1t. 

Copernicus had no hesitation in attributing motion to the earth, but 

Tycho wished to correct him on this point, regarding it as absurd from the 

point of view of physics, and in conflict with the common opinion of 

mankind. But he did not pay sufficient attention to the true nature of 
motion, and hence, despite his verbal insistence that the earth is at rest, in 
actual fact he attributed more motion to it than did Copernicus.! 


19. My denial of the earth’s motion is more careful than the Copernican 
view and more correct than Tycho’s view. 

The only difference between my position and those of Copernicus and 
Tycho is that I propose to avoid attributing any motion to the earth, thus 
keeping closer to the truth than Tycho while at the same time being more 
careful than Copernicus. I will put forward the hypothesis that seems to 
be the simplest of all both for understanding the appearances and for 
investigating their natural causes. And | wish this to be considered simply 
as a hypothesis <or supposition that may be false> and not as the real 
truth. 


20. The fixed stars must be supposed to be extremely far distant from 
Saturn. 


21. The sun, like a flame, is composed of matter which is extremely 
mobile, but it does not on that account move from one place to 
another. 


22. The sun differs from a flame in not requiring fuel in the same way. 


23. The fixed stars do not all turn on the same sphere; but each star has a 
vast space around it which is not occupied by any other star. 


24. The heavens are fluid. 


25. The heavens carry along with them all the bodies which they contain. 


1 Descartes’ complaint seems to be that Tycho failed to recognize the essentially relative 
nature of motion; see below, art. 28, and above, Part 2, art. 25-30. 


86 


(87) 


gI 


252 Principles of Philosophy 


26. The earth is at rest in its own heaven, but nonetheless it is carried 
along by it. 


27. The same view should be taken of all the planets. 


28. Strictly speaking, the earth does not move, any more than the 
planets, although they are all carried along by the heaven. 

Here we must bear in mind what I said above about the nature of 
motion,! namely that if we use the term ‘motion’ in the strict sense and in 
accordance with the truth of things, then motion is simply the transfer of 
one body from the vicinity of the other bodies which are in immediate 
contact with it, and which are regarded as being at rest, to the vicinity of 
other bodies. But it often happens that, in accordance with ordinary 
usage, any action whereby a body travels from one place to another is 
called ‘motion’; and in this sense it can be said that the same thing moves 
and does not move at the same time, depending on how we determine its 
location. It follows from this that in the strict sense there is no motion 
occurring in the case of the earth or even the other planets, since they are 
not transferred from the vicinity of those parts of the heaven with which 
they are in immediate contact, in so far as these parts are considered as 
being at rest. Such a transfer would require them to move away from all 
these parts at the same time, which does not occur. But since the celestial 
material is fluid, at any given time different groups of particles move 
away from the planet with which they are in contact, by a motion which 
should be attributed solely to the particles, not to the planet. In the same 
way, the partial transfers of water and air which occur on the surface of 
the earth are not normally attributed to the earth itself, but to the 
parts of water and air which are transferred. 


29. No motion should be attributed to the earth even if ‘motion’ is taken 
in the loose sense, in accordance with ordinary usage; but in this 
sense it is correct to say that the other planets move. 

But if we construe ‘motion’ in accordance with ordinary usage, then all 

the other planets, and even the sun and fixed stars should be said to 

move; but the same cannot without great awkwardness be said of the 
earth. For the common practice is to determine the position of the stars 
from certain sites on the earth that are regarded as being immobile: the 
stars are deemed to move in so far as they pass these fixed spots. This is 
convenient for practical purposes, and so is quite reasonable. Indeed all 
of us from earliest years have reckoned the earth to be not a globe but a 


t See Part 2, art. 25, p. 233. 


Part Three 2.53 


flat surface, such that ‘up’ and ‘down’ are everywhere the same, and the 
four directions, east, west, south and north, are the same for any point on 
the surface; and we have all used these directions for specifying the 
location of any other body. But what of a philosopher who realizes that 
the earth is a globe contained in a fluid and mobile heaven, and that the 
sun and the fixed stars always preserve the same positions relative to each 
other? If he takes these bodies as immobile for the purpose of determin- 
ing the earth’s location, and thus asserts that the earth itself moves, 
his way of talking is quite unreasonable. First of all, location in the 
philosophical sense must be determined not by means of very remote 
bodies like the stars, but with reference to bodies which are contiguous 
with the body which is said to move. Secondly, if we follow ordinary 
usage, there is no reason for considering that it is the stars which are at 
rest rather than the earth, unless we believe that there are no other bodies 
beyond them from which they are receding, and with reference to which 
it can be said that they move but the earth is at rest (in the same sense as 
the earth is said to move with reference to the stars). Yet to believe this is 
irrational. For since our mind is of such a nature as to recognize no limits 
in the universe, whoever considers the immensity of God and the 
weakness of our senses will conclude that it is much more reasonable to 
suspect that there may be other bodies beyond all the visible fixed stars; 
and that, with reference to these bodies, the earth may be said to be at 
rest, but all the stars may be said to be in simultaneous motion. This is 
surely more reasonable than supposing that there cannot possibly be any 
such bodies <because the creator’s power is so imperfect; for this must be 
the supposition of those who maintain in this way that the earth moves. 
And if, later on, to conform to ordinary usage, we appear to attribute 
motion to the earth, it should be remembered that this is an improper 
way of speaking — rather like the way in which we may sometimes say 
that passengers asleep on a ferry ‘move’ from Calais to Dover, because 
the ship takes them there>. 


30. All the planets are carried round the sun by the heaven. 

Let us thus put aside all worries regarding the earth’s motion, and 
suppose that the whole of the celestial matter in which the planets are 
located turns continuously like a vortex with the sun at its centre. 
Further, let us suppose that the parts of the vortex which are nearer the 
sun move more swiftly than the more distant parts, and that all the 
planets (including the earth) always stay surrounded by the same 
parts of celestial matter. This single supposition enables us to understand 
all the observed movements of the planets with great ease, without 


92. 


254 Principles of Philosophy 


invoking any machinery.! In a river there are various places where the 
water twists around on itself and forms a whirlpool. If there is flotsam on 
the water we see it carried around with the whirlpool, and in some cases 
we see it also rotating about its own centre; further, the bits which are 
nearer the centre of the whirlpool complete a revolution more quickly; 
and finally, although such flotsam always has a circular motion, it 
scarcely ever describes a perfect circle but undergoes some longitudinal 
and latitudinal deviations. We can without any difficulty :magine all this 
happening in the same way in the case of the planets, and this single 
account explains all the planetary movements that we observe. 


31. How the individual planets are carried along. 
32. The movement of sun spots. 


33. How the earth rotates about its own centre, and the moon revolves 
around the earth. 


34. The motions of the heavens are not perfectly circular. 


35. The latitudinal inclinations of the planets [from the plane of the 
ecliptic]. 


36. Their longitudinal motion [around the sun]. 


37. All the phenomena [of the solar system] can be very easily 
understood by means of this hypothesis. 


38. According to Tycho’s hypothesis the earth should be said to move 
about its own centre. 


39. It should also be said to move annually around the sun. 


40. The [annual] movement of the earth does not produce any apparent 
change in the position of the fixed stars, on account of their immense 
distance. 


41. The supposition that the fixed stars are very distant is also required 
to explain the motion of comets, which are now agreed to be celestial 


bodies. 


1 Earlier theories had suggested that the planets were carried along by complicated systems 
of rotating spheres. 


Part Three 255 


42. The relevant phenomena include all the things we see here on earth; 
but initially there is no need to consider them all. 

In addition to these rather general phenomena, there are also many 
particular matters not only regarding the sun, the planets, the comets and 
the fixed stars, but also concerning the earth (namely everything that 
we see on its surface), which may be included among the relevant 
phenomena here. For, in order to come to know the true nature of this 
visible world, it is not enough to find causes which provide an explana- 
tion of what we see far off in the heavens; the selfsame causes must also 
allow everything which we see right here on earth to be deduced from 
them. There is, however, no need for us to consider all these terrestrial 
phenomena in order to determine the causes of more general things. But 
we shall know that we have determined such causes correctly afterwards, 
when we notice that they serve to explain not only the effects which we 
were originally looking at, but all these other phenomena, which we were 
not thinking of beforehand. 


43. Ifacause allows all the phenomena to be clearly deduced from it, 
then it is virtually impossible that it should not be true. 

Suppose, then, that we use only principles which we see to be utterly 
evident, and that all our subsequent deductions follow by mathematical 
reasoning: if it turns out that the results of such deductions agree 
accurately with all natural phenomena, we would seem to be doing God 
an injustice if we suspected that the causal explanations discovered in this 
way were false. For this would imply that God had endowed us with such 
an imperfect nature that even the proper use of our powers of reasoning 
allowed us to go wrong. 


44. Nevertheless, I want the causes that I shall set out here to be 
regarded simply as hypotheses. 

When philosophizing about such important matters, however, it would 
seem to be excessively arrogant for us to assert that we have discovered 
the exact truth <where others have failed>; and so I should prefer to leave 
this claim on one side, and put forward everything that I am about to 
write simply as a hypothesis <which is perhaps far from the truth, so as to 
leave everyone free to make up his own mind>. And if it is thought that 
the hypothesis is false, I shall think I have achieved something sufficiently 
worthwhile if everything deduced from it agrees with our observations; 
for if this is so, we shall see that our hypothesis yields just as much 
practical benefit for our lives as we would have derived from knowledge 
of the actual truth <because we shall be able to use it just as effectively to 
manipulate natural causes so as to produce the effects we desire>. 


99 


IO0O 


IOI 


256 Principles of Philosophy 


45. I shall even make some assumptions which are agreed to be false. 
Indeed, in order to provide a better explanation for the things found in 
nature, I shall take my investigation of their causes right back to a time 
before the period when I believe that the causes actually came into 
existence.’ For there is no doubt that the world was created right from 
the start with all the perfection which it now has. The sun and earth and 
moon and stars thus existed in the beginning, and, what is more, the 
earth contained not just the seeds of plants but the plants themselves; and 
Adam and Eve were not born as babies but were created as fully grown 
people. This is the doctrine of the Christian faith, and our natural reason 
convinces us that it was so. For if we consider the infinite power of God, 
we cannot think that he ever created anything that was not wholly 
perfect of its kind. Nevertheless, if we want to understand the nature of 
plants or of men, it is much better to consider how they can gradually 
grow from seeds than to consider how they were created by God at the 
very beginning of the world. Thus we may be able to think up certain 
very simple and easily known principles which can serve, as it were, as 
the seeds from which we can demonstrate that the stars, the earth and 
indeed everything we observe in this visible world could have sprung. For 
although we know for sure that they never did arise in this way, we shall 
be able to provide a much better explanation of their nature by this 
method than if we merely described them as they now are <or as we 
believe them to have been created>. And since I believe I have in fact 
found such principles, I shall give a brief account of them here. 


46. The assumptions that I am making here in order to give an 
explanation of all phenomena. 

From what has already been said we have established that all the bodies 
in the universe are composed of one and the same matter, which is 
divisible into indefinitely many parts, and is in fact divided into a large 
number of parts which move in different directions and have a sort of 
circular motion; moreover, the same quantity of motion is always 
preserved in the universe.” However, we cannot determine by reason 
alone how big these pieces of matter are, or how fast they move, or what 
kinds of circle they describe. Since there are countless different configura- 
tions which God might have instituted here, experience alone must teach 
us which configurations he actually selected in preference to the rest. We 
are thus free to make any assumption on these matters with the sole 


1 The French version reads: ‘Indeed, so far from wishing my readers to believe everything I 
write, I propose to put forward certain propositions which I believe are absolutely false.’ 
2 See Part 2, esp. art. 20, 22, 33, 34, 39 and 4o. 


Part Three 2.57 


proviso that all the consequences of our assumption must agree with our 
experience. So, if we may, we will suppose that the matter of which the 
visible world is composed was originally divided by God into particles 
which were approximately equal, and of a size which was moderate, or 
intermediate when compared with those that now make up the heavens 
and stars. We will also suppose that the total amount of motion they 
possessed was equal to that now found in the universe; and that their 
motions were of two kinds, each of equal force. First, they moved 
individually and separately about their own centres, so as to form a fluid 
body such as we take the heavens to be; and secondly, they moved 
together in groups around certain other equidistant points corresponding 
to the present centres of the fixed stars, and also around other rather 
more numerous points equalling the number of the planets <and the 
comets>, ...so as to make up as many different vortices! as there are now 
heavenly bodies in the universe. 


47. The falsity of these suppositions does not prevent the consequences 
deduced from them being true and certain. 

These few assumptions seem to me to be sufficient to serve as the causes 
<or principles> from which all the effects observed in our universe would 
arise in accordance with the laws of nature set out above.” And I do not 
think it is possible to think up any alternative principles for explaining 
the real world that are simpler, or easier to understand, or even more 
probable. It may be possible to start from primeval chaos <as described by 
the poets, i.e. a total confusion in all parts of the universe> and deduce 
from it, in accordance with the laws of nature, the precise organization 
now to be found in things; and I once undertook to provide such an 
explanation.’ But confusion seems less in accordance with the supreme 
perfection of God the creator of all things than proportion or order; and 
it is not possible for us to have such a distinct perception of it. What is 
more, no proportion or order is simpler or easier to know than that 
characterized by complete equality in every respect. This is why I am 
supposing at this point that all the particles of matter were initially equal 
in respect both of their size and their motion; and I am allowing no 
inequality in the universe beyond that which exists in the position of the 
fixed stars, which is so clearly apparent to anyone looking at the night 
sky that it is quite impossible to deny it. In fact it makes very little 
difference what initial suppositions are made, since all subsequent change 


1 ‘From now on I shall use this word to refer to all the matter which revolves in this way 
around each of the centres’ (added in French version). 

2 Part 2, art. 37-40, pp. 240ff. 

3 Cf. The World, ch. 6 (above, p. 90); Discourse, part 5 (above, p. 132). 


102 


103 


(104): 


(105) 


(106) 


(107) 


(108) 


258 Principles of Philosophy 


must occur in accordance with the laws of nature. And there is scarcely 
any supposition that does not allow the same effects (albeit more 
laboriously) to be deduced in accordance with the same laws of nature. 
For by the operation of these laws matter must successively assume all 
the forms of which it is capable; and, if we consider these forms in order, 
we will eventually be able to arrive at the form which characterizes the 
universe in its present state. Hence in this connection we need not fear 
that any error can arise from a false supposition. 


48. How all the particles of celestial matter become spherical. 


49. There must be other more subtle matter <more tiny particles> 
around these spherical particles <to fill all the space in that area>. 


50. The particles of this more subtle matter can be very easily divided. 


51. And they move very quickly. 


52. There are three elements of this visible world. 

We have... two very different kinds of matter which can be said to be 
the first two elements of this visible universe. The first element is made up 
of matter which is so violently agitated that when it meets other bodies it 
is divided into particles of indefinite smallness ... The second is 
composed of matter divided into spherical particles which are still very 
minute when compared with those that we can see with our eyes, but 
which have a definite fixed quantity and can be divided into other much 
smaller particles. The third element, which we shall discover a little later 
on, consists of particles which are much bulkier or have shapes less 
suited for motion. From these elements, as we shall show, all the bodies 
of this visible universe are composed. The sun and fixed stars are 
composed of the first element, the heavens from the second, and the 
earth with the planets and comets from the third... 


53. Three heavens can also be distinguished in it. 
54. How the sun and fixed stars were formed. 


55. What light is. 
It is a law of nature that all bodies moving in a circle move away from the 


Part Three 259 


centre of their motion in so far as they can.! I shall now explain as 
carefully as I can the force by means of which the globules of the second 
element ... strive to move away from their centres of motion; for the 
nature of light consists in this alone, as will be shown below, and there 
are many other matters which depend on knowledge of this point. 


56. The striving after motion in inanimate things, and how it should be 
understood. 

When I say that the globules of the second element ‘strive’ to move away 
from the centres around which they revolve, it should not be thought that 
I am implying that they have some thought from which this striving 
proceeds. I mean merely that they are positioned and pushed into motion 
in such a way that they will in fact travel in that direction, unless they are 
prevented by some other cause. 


57. How the same body can be said to strive to move in different 
directions at the same time. 

Often many different causes act simultaneously on the same body, and 

one may hinder the effect of another. So, depending on the causes we are 

considering, we may say that the body is tending or striving to move in 

different directions at the same time. For example, the stone A [see Fig. §] 


Fig. § 


1 See Part 2, art. 39, above p. 241. 


109 


(110) 


(111) 


(112) 


(113) 


(114) 


(115) 


(116) 


(117) 


(118) 


260 Principles of Philosophy 


in the sling EA which is swung about the centre E tends to go from A to 
B, if we consider all the causes which go to determine its motion, since it 
does in fact go in this direction. But if we concentrate simply on the 
power of moving which is in the stone itself, we shall say that when it is 
at point A it tends towards C, in accordance with the law stated above 
(supposing, of course, that the line AC is a straight line which touches the 
circle at point A). For if the stone were to leave the sling at the exact 
moment when it arrived from L at point A, it would in fact go from A 
towards C, not towards B; and although the sling may prevent this 
outcome, it does not prevent the ‘striving’. Finally, if we concentrate not 
on the stone’s total power of moving but only on that part which is 
checked by the sling, and we distinguish this from the remaining part 
which produces the actual result, we shall say that when the stone is at 
point A, it tends to move simply towards D, or that it ‘strives’ to move 
away from the centre E along the straight line EAD. 


58. How bodies moving ina circle strive to move away from their centre 
of motion. 


59. The extent of the force of this striving. 
60. This striving is found in celestial matter. 
61. This is the cause of the sun and the fixed stars being round. 


62. It is also the reason why celestial matter strives to move away from 
all the points of the circumference of each star or of the sun. 


63. The globules of celestial matter do not hinder each other in this 
striving. 

64. This striving explains all the properties of light. And as a result of it, 
light could be seen to emanate from the stars, despite the lack of any 


light-producing force in the stars themselves. 


65. The poles of each celestial vortex touch the parts of other vortices 
which are remote from their poles. 


66. There must be some deflection in the motion of the vortices so that 
they can move in harmony. 


67. The poles of any two vortices cannot be in contact. 


68. 


69. 


70. 


a1. 
a2. 
73+ 
74: 


75: 


76. 


77° 


78. 


79+ 


8o. 


SI. 


82. 


Part Three 261 


The vortices are of unequal size. (119) 


The matter of the first element flows from the poles of each vortex 


towards its centre, and from the centre towards the other 
parts. 


The same thing cannot be supposed to occur in the case of the matter (121) 
of the second element. 


The reason for this difference. (123) 


How the matter of which the sun is made moves. (125) 


There are various inequalities in the position of the solar body. 


There are also various inequalities in the movements of its matter. (128) 


These inequalities do not prevent the shape of the sun from being (129) 
round. 
The motion of the first element as it travels between the globules of (131) 


the second element. 


How the light of the sun is diffused not only towards the ecliptic but 
also towards the poles. 


How it is diffused towards the ecliptic. (133) 


The motion of one small body readily produces motion in other 
bodies which are so exceedingly remote from it. 


How the light of the sun moves towards the poles. (134) 


Whether the strength of the light at the ecliptic is equal to thatatthe (135) 
poles. 


The globules of the second element which are near the sun are (137) 
smaller, and move more quickly, than those which are more remote; 
this is true up to a certain distance, beyond which all the globules are 


equal in size and hence move more quickly the further they are from 
the sun. 


262 


83. 


(138) 84. 
(140) 85. 
(142) 86. 
87 
(144) 88. 
89. 
90. 
(145) 91. 
92. 
(147) 93. 
94. 
(148) 95- 
96. 
(149) 97. 


Principles of Philosophy 


Why the globules that are very remote move more quickly than those 
which are slightly less remote. 


Why the globules closest to the sun move more quickly than those 
which are slightly farther away. 


Why the globules nearest to the sun are smaller than those which are 
more remote. 


The globules of the second element move in various different ways at 
the same time; and as a result they become completely 
spherical. 


. There are various degrees of speed in the tiny particles of the first 


element. 


Those tiny particles which have the least speed easily transfer what 
speed they have to other particles, and stick to one another. 


Such clusters of tiny particles are chiefly found in the matter of the 
first element which is carried from the poles to the centres of the 
vortices. 


The shape of these minute particles, which will from now on be 
called striated particles. 


The particles coming from opposite poles are twisted in opposite 
ways. 


There are only three grooves in them. 


Besides these striated particles, and those which are the most minute 
of all, the first element contains other particles of various sizes. 


How these particles produce spots on the surface of the sun and the 
stars. 


This enables us to ascertain the principal properties of these spots. 
How the spots disintegrate, and new ones are produced. 


Why it is that the colours of the rainbow appear at the extremities of 
some spots. 


98. 


99. 


IOO. 


IOL. 


IO2. 


103. 


104. 


1O5. 


106. 


107. 


108. 


109. 
110. 
III. 
112. 


113. 


II4. 


I15. 


Part Three 263 
How spots are converted into bright areas, and vice versa. 
The kinds of particles into which sunspots disintegrate. 


How the ether round the sun and stars is produced from these 
particles. This ether and the spots belong to the third element. 


The production and disintegration of spots depends on very 
uncertain causes. 


How the same spot can cover an entire star. 


Why the sun sometimes appears less bright, and why the apparent 
magnitudes of certain stars change. 


Why some fixed stars disappear or appear unexpectedly. 


There are many passages in the spots through which the striated 
particles freely pass. 


The arrangement of these passages, and why the striated particles 
cannot return through them. 


Why particles coming from one pole do not pass through the same 
passages as those coming from the opposite pole. 


How the matter of the first element passes through these passages. 


Other passages intersect them crosswise. 

The light of such stars can scarcely pass through a spot. 
Description of a star appearing unexpectedly. 
Description of a star gradually disappearing. 


In all spots there are many passages hollowed out by striated 
particles. 


The same star can appear and disappear in turn. 


An entire vortex which contains a star at its centre can sometimes 
be destroyed. 


(150) 


(151) 


(152) 


(153) 


(154) 


(173) 


(174) 


(176) 
(178) 
(179) 
(180) 


(182) 


(185) 


264 


LI7. 


118. 


IIg. 


I20. 


I21. 


I22. 


123. 


124. 


125. 


126. 


127: 


128. 


129. 


130. 


131. 


132, 


Principles of Philosophy 


. How it can be destroyed before many spots have gathered around 


its star. 


How there can be very many spots around a star before its vortex is 
destroyed. 


How such a large number of spots is produced. 
How a fixed star is changed into a comet or a planet. 


The direction in which such a star moves when it first ceases to be 


fixed. 


What we understand by the solidity of bodies, and their 
agitation. 


Solidity depends not on matter alone but also on size and 


shape. 

How celestial globules can be more solid than a whole star. 
How they can also be less solid. 

How some are more solid than a star and others less solid. 
What sets a comet in motion. 

The continuation of a comet’s motion through various vortices. 
Pienunena pertaining to comets. 

The explanation of these phenomena. 

How the light of a fixed star reaches the earth. 


Whether the fixed stars are seen in their true locations; and what 
the firmament is. 


Why comets are not seen by us when they are outside our heaven; 
and, incidentally, why coals are black and ashes white. 


133. The tail of a comet and its various phenomena. 


139. 


140. 


I5I. 


152. 


Part Three 265 


. The type of refraction responsible for a comet’s tail. 
. The explanation of this refraction. 

. The explanation of the appearance of the tail. 

. How beams of fire also appear. 


. Why the tail of a comet does not always appear in a direction 


directly opposite to the sun and does not always appear straight. 
Why such tails do not appear around the fixed stars or planets. 


What sets a planet in motion. 


. The causes of the deviations in planetary motions. The first cause. 
. The second. 

. The third. 

. The fourth 


. The fifth. 
. The initial formation of all the planets. 


. Why some of the planets are more remote from the sun; this does 


not depend on their size alone. 


. Why those nearer to the sun move faster, although the sun’s spots 


move very slowly. 


. Why the moon revolves around the earth. 


. Why the earth rotates on its axis. 


Why the moon moves faster than the earth. 


Why very nearly the same face of the moon is always turned 
towards the earth. 


(199) 


(200) 


(201) 


(202) 


266 Principles of Philosophy 


153. Why the moon moves faster and diverges less from its mean motion 
in conjunction than in quadrature; and why its heaven ts not round. 


154. Why the secondary planets which are around Jupiter move so fast, 
while those around Saturn move so slowly, or not at all. 


155. Why the distance between the poles of the equator and the ecliptic 
is sO great. 


156. Why the distance is gradually lessening. 


157. The ultimate and most general cause of all the inequalities to be 
found in the motions of the bodies in the universe. 

Lastly, we shall not be surprised at the fact that all the planets, despite 
their constant tendency to move in a circular fashion, never describe 
perfect circles but are always subject to slight deviations of all kinds, 
both longitudinal and latitudinal. For all the bodies that are in the 
universe are contiguous and interact with each other <a vacuum being 
quite impossible>, so that the motion of any one body depends on the 
motion of all the others, and hence is subject to countless variations. | 
think I have here given a satisfactory explanation of absolutely every 
phenomenon that we observe in the heavens above us. It remains for us 
to deal next with the phenomena we see here on earth. 


PART FOUR 


The Earth 


1. The false hypothesis which I have already used must be retained to 
provide an explanation of the true natures of things. 

Although, as I have already pointed out,' I am unwilling to believe that 
the bodies in this visible universe were ever produced in the manner 
described above, I must still retain the same hypothesis for explaining 
what we observe here on earth. For if, as I hope, I can show clearly that 
this method, and no other, enables us to supply causes for all natural 
objects, it will be fair to conclude that <although the world was not made 
in this fashion in the beginning, but was created ready-made by God> 
the nature of these objects is exactly the same as it would be if they had in 
fact been produced in the manner described. 


2. How, according to this hypothesis, the earth was produced. 


3. The division of the earth into three regions. The description of the 
first. 


4. The description of the second. 
5. The description of the third. 


6. The particles of the third element which are in this third region must 
be fairly large. 


7. These particles can be changed by the action of the first and second 
elements. 


8. They are bigger than the globules of the second element but less solid 
and less agitated. 


9. From the beginning they have formed successive layers around the 
earth. 


1 Part 3, art. 45, p. 256 above. 


267 


203 


(204) 


(205) 


(206) 


(207) 


(208) 


(209) 


(210) 


(211) 


(212) 


268 Principles of Philosophy 


10. Various gaps have been left around them, which are filled with 
matter of the first and second elements. 


11. The globules of the second element were originally smaller, the 
nearer they were to the centre of the earth. 


12. And they had narrower passages to pass through. 
13. The thicker particles were not always below the thinner. 


14. The original formation of various bodies in the third region of the 
earth. 


15. The forces which caused these bodies to be produced. First, the 
general motion of the celestial globules. 


16. The first effect of this first force is to make bodies transparent. 


17. How a solid and hard body can have enough passages to transmit 
rays of light. 


18. The second effect of this first force is to separate one body from 
another and to purify liquids. 


19. The third effect is to make drops of liquid round. 


20. Explanation of the second force, which is called ‘gravity’ .! 

The force of gravity does not differ greatly from the third action of the 
celestial globules. These globules, merely in virtue of their indiscriminate 
motion in all directions exert an equal pressure on all the particles of each 
drop of liquid, thus pressing them towards the centre of the drop and 
making the drop itself round. And in virtue of the selfsame motion, when 
the globules are prevented from moving in a straight line by encountering 
the entire mass of the earth, they propel all the earth’s particles towards 
the centre, and this is what the ‘gravity’ of terrestrial bodies consists in. 


21. All the parts of the earth, considered in themselves, are not heavy but 
light. 

To achieve a perfect understanding of the nature of gravity, we must first 

of all note the following point. Imagine that all the spaces around the 

earth unoccupied by terrestrial matter were empty, i.e. contained nothing 


1 See footnote 1, p. 234 above. 


Part Four 269 


except bodies which in no way hindered or assisted the motion of other 
bodies (which is the only intelligible way of understanding the term 
‘empty’); and suppose further that the earth revolved about its axis by its 
own motion in the space of twenty-four hours. In this case all the 
terrestrial particles which were not very firmly joined together would 
leap off in all directions towards the heavens. In just the same way, if you 
throw sand on a spinning top you will see it immediately fly off and 
disperse in all directions. Thus the earth would have to be called light 
rather than heavy. 


22. What the lightness of the celestial matter consists in. 

Since, however, there is no such vacuum, and the earth is not driven! by 
its own motion but by the celestial matter which surrounds it and 
pervades all its pores, it behaves like a body at rest. Yet in so far as the 
whole of the celestial matter moves uniformly with the earth as it drives 
it, it has no force of heaviness or lightness. But in so far as its parts have a 
greater degree of agitation than they use up in driving the earth, and are 
prevented, by encountering the earth, from continuing their rectilinear 
motion, they always move away from the earth as far as they can, and 
this is what their lightness consists in. 


23. How all the parts of the earth are driven downwards by the celestial 
matter, and so become heavy. 

Next we should note that the power which the individual particles of 
celestial matter have to move away from <the centre of> the earth cannot 
achieve its effect unless, in moving upwards, the particles displace various 
terrestrial particles, thus pushing them and driving them downwards. 
Now all the space around the earth is occupied either by particles of 
terrestrial bodies or by celestial matter. All the globules of the celestial 
matter have an equal tendency to move away from the earth and thus no 
individual one has the force to displace any other. But the particles of 
terrestrial bodies do not have this tendency to so great an extent. So 
whenever any celestial globules have any terrestrial particles above them 
they must exert all their force to displace them. Thus the gravity of any 
terrestrial body is not strictly produced by all the celestial matter 
surrounding it, but only and exactly by the part of it which rises into the 
space left by the body as it descends, and hence which equals it in size. . . 


24. How much heaviness there is in each body. 


1 The Latin is ambiguous as to whether the motion referred to is the earth’s diurnal 
rotation or its annual revolution. The French version specifies the former. 


213 


(214) 


270 Principles of Philosophy 


25. This quantity does not correspond to the quantity of matter in each 


body. 


(215) 26. Why bodies do not gravitate downwards when they are in their own 
natural places. 


(216) 27. Gravity pushes bodies down towards the centre of the earth. 
(217) 28. The third force, which is light. How it moves the particles of air. 


(218) 29. The fourth force, which is heat. What it is and how it persists even 
when light is removed. 


30. Why it penetrates farther than light. 
31. Why it rarefies almost all bodies <and condenses some>. 


32. How the highest region of the earth was first divided into two 
different bodies. 


(220) 33. The distinction between three principal kinds of terrestrial particle. 
34. How a third body was formed in between the first two. 

(221) 35. The particles contained in this body are of one kind only. 

(222) 36. Amd they are of only two specific types. 

(223) 35, How the lowest body was divided into many others. 

(224) 38. The formation of another, fourth, body above the third. 

(225) 39. The accretion of this fourth body, and the purification of the third. 


(226) 40. How the bulk of this third body was reduced, so as to leave a space 
between it and the fourth body. 


(227) 41. How there were many fissures produced in the fourth body. 
(228) 42. How it was broken with various pieces. 


(230) 43. How the third body has partly moved above the fourth and partly 
remained below. 


44. 


45. 
46. 
47: 


48. 


49. 


50. 


SI. 
52. 
53: 


54. 


55: 


56. 


57: 
58. 
59. 
60. 


61. 


Part Four 271 


This is the reason why mountains, plains, seas, etc. were produced 
on the surface of the earth. 


The nature of air. 
Why it is easily rarefied and condensed. 
How it can be forcibly compressed in certain machines. 


The nature of water, and how it easily turns either into air or into 
ice. 


The ebb and flow of the tides. 


Why the tide rises for six 1/5th hours and falls for six 1/ 5th 
hours. 


Why the tides are greater when the moon is full or new. 
Why they are greatest at the equinoxes. 
Why air and water always flow from east to west. 


Why regions having sea to the east are more temperate than others at 
the same latitude. 


Why there is no ebb and flow in lakes or swamps; and why it occurs 
at different hours on different shores. 


How we should investigate the particular causes of this on the 
individual shores. 


The nature of the earth’s interior. 

The nature of quicksilver. 

The variation in the heat pervading the earth’s interior. 
The action of this heat. 


The bitter juices and acids from which vitriol, alum etc. are formed. 


(231) 


(232) 


(237) 


(238) 


(239) 


(240) 


(241) 


(242) 


(243) 


(244) 


(245) 


(246) 


(247) 


272 
62. 


63. 


64. 


65. 


66. 
67. 
68. 
69. 


70. 


Ti; 


72. 


Principles of Philosophy 
The oleaginous matter of bitumen, sulphur etc. 


The basic elements of the chemists; and how metals come up into 
mines. 


The exterior of the earth, and the origin of springs. 


Why the sea does not increase as a result of the rivers flowing 
into tt. 


Why springs are not salt, and seawater does not become fresh. 
Why the water in certain wells is brackish. 

Why salt is also dug out of certain mountains. 

Nitre, and other salts which are different from sea salt. 


Vapours, acrid spirits and exhalations which come up from the 
earth’s interior to the exterior. 


How the various mixtures of these produce various kinds of stones 
and other minerals. 


How metals reach the exterior of the earth from its interior; and 
how minium is formed. 


. Why metals are not found everywhere on earth. 


. Why they are found especially at the base of mountains towards the 


south and east. 


. All mines are in the exterior of the earth; the interior can never be 


reached by digging. 


. Sulphur, bitumen, clay and oil. 
. How an earthquake occurs. 
. Why fire erupts from certain mountains. 


. Why there are usually several tremors in an earthquake, so that it 


sometimes lasts for several hours or days. 


Part Four 273 
80. The nature of fire, and the difference between fire and air. 
a. How fire is first kindled. (250) 
82. How it is kept going. 


83. Why it needs fuel. 


84. How it is sparked off by striking flints. (251) 
85. How it is kindled from dry twigs. (252) 
86. Or by focussing the rays of the sun. (253) 


87. Or simply by very violent motion. 

88. Or by mixing of various bodies. 

89. In lightning and shooting stars. (254) 
go. In things which shine and do not burn, such as falling stars. 

g1. In drops of seawater, in rotten wood and the like. (255) 
92. In things which grow hot but do not shine, such as stored hay. (256) 
93. In lime sprinkled with water, and other cases. (257) 
94. How fire ts kindled in cavities of the earth. (258) 
95. How a candle burns. 

96. How the fire in a candle is kept going. (259) 
97. Why its flame is pointed and smoke comes out of it. 

98. How air and other bodies feed the flame. (260) 
99. The movement of air towards a fire. 


100. What extinguishes fire. 


(261) 


(262) 


(263) 


(264) 


(265) 


(267) 


(268) 


274 


IOlI. 


IO2. 


103. 


104. 


105. 


106. 


107. 


108. 


109. 


IIo. 


IIil. 


I1I2. 


113. 


114. 


115. 


116. 


117. 


118. 


119. 


Principles of Philosophy 


The necessary conditions for a body to be suitable for fuelling 
a fire. 


Why the flame from alcohol does not burn a linen cloth. 
Why alcohol burns very easily. 
Why it is very difficult for water to burn. 


Why the force of great fires is increased by throwing water or salt 
on them. 


What kinds of bodies burn easily. 
Why certain bodies are inflammable and others not. 
Why fire is kept going for a considerable time in live coals. 


How gunpowder is made from sulphur, nitre and charcoal. First, 
the nature of sulphur. 


Nitre. 
The combination of sulpbur and nitre. 
The motion of the particles of nitre. 


Why the flame from this powder is greatly dilated and tts principal 
action is towards bodies which are above it. 


Charcoal. 

The grains of this powder, and what its principal force consists in. 
Lanterns which burn for a very long time. 

The remaining effects of fire. 

The bodies which liquefy and boil when brought near to fire. 


The bodies which dry up and become hard. 


I 20. 


I2I. 


133. 


134. 


135. 


Part Four 275 
Three kinds of waters: burning, insipid, and acidic. 


Sublimates and oils. 


. Alterations in the effect of fire when its intensity is altered. 

. Lime. 

. How glass is made. 

. How its particles are joined together. 

. Why it is liquid when it is white hot and easily takes on any shape. 
. Why it is very hard when cold. 

. Why it is very fragile. 

. Why its fragility decreases if it is cooled slowly. 

. Why it is transparent. 

. How it becomes coloured. 


. Why it is rigid like a bow; and, in general, why rigid bodies, when 


bent, spontaneously return to their former shape. 


Magnetic ore. Recapitulation of the points made above which 
are required to explain tt. 


There are no passages in air or water suitable for receiving striated 
particles. 


There are none in any bodies belonging to the earth’s exterior, 
except for iron. 


. Why there are such passages in iron. 
. Why such passages exist even in single iron filings. 


. How the passages are made suitable for receiving striated particles 


coming from either direction. 


(269) 


(270) 


(271) 


(272) 


(273) 


(274) 


(275) 


(276) 


(277) 


(279) 
(280) 


(281) 


(290) 


(291) 


(292) 


(294) 


(295) 


276 


139. 


1§3. 


154. 


I§5. 


156. 


Principles of Philosophy 


The nature of a magnet. 


. How steel and any kind of iron is made by smelting. 
. Why steel is very hard, rigid and fragile. 

. The difference between steel and other iron. 

. How steel is tempered. 


. The difference in the passages found in a magnet, in steel, and in 


iron. 


. Enumeration of the properties of magnets. 
. How striated particles flow through the passages of the earth. 


. It is harder for them to move through the air, the water and the 


exterior part of the earth than through the interior. 


. It is easier for them to go through a magnet than through other 


bodies on the earth’s exterior. 


. What the poles of a magnet are. 
. Why these poles turn towards the earth’s poles. 
. Why they are also inclined at a certain angle towards its centre. 


. Why one magnet turns and inclines itself towards another magnet 


in the same way as it does towards the earth. 


Why two magnets attract each other, and the sphere of action of 
each. 


Why they sometimes repel each other. 


Why the parts of the segments of a magnet which were previously 
joined also repel each other. 


Why, if a magnet is broken up, two previously contiguous but now 
separated points are poles with opposite powers. 


157. 


158. 


159. 


160. 


161. 


162. 


163. 


165. 


166. 


168. 


169. 


170. 


I7I. 


Part Four 277 


Why there is the same power in any part of a magnet as there is in 
the whole magnet. 


Why a magnet imparts its power to a piece of iron which is made to 
touch it. 


Why the piece of iron receives this power in various ways 
corresponding to the different ways in which it touches the magnet. 


Why an oblong piece of iron can receive the power only along its 
length. 


Why a magnet loses none of its power by imparting it to the 
iron. 


Why this power is imparted to the iron very quickly, although it 
takes some time for it to be firmly fixed in it. 


Why steel is better fitted to receive the power than baser types of 
iron. 


. Why more power is imparted by a more perfect magnet than by a 


less perfect one. 
Why the earth itself imparts magnetic power to the iron. 


Why the magnetic power in the earth is weaker than that in small 
magnets. 


. Why needles touched by a magnet always have their magnetic poles 


at their extremities. 


Why magnetic poles do not always point accurately to the earth’s 
poles, but diverge from them at various angles. 


Why this divergence alters in time. 
Why the divergence can be smaller when the magnet is made to 
stand on one of its poles than when its poles are equidistant from 


the earth. 


Why a magnet attracts iron. 


(297) 


(298) 


(299) 


(3.00) 


(301) 


(302) 


(303) 


(304) 


(305) 


(306) 


(307) 
(309) 


(310) 


(311) 
(312) 
(313) 


(314) 


278 


P72. 


173: 


174. 


175. 


177. 


178. 


179. 


180. 


Principles of Philosophy 


Why an armed magnet lifts much more iron than an unarmed 
one. 


Why its poles, although they are mutual opposites, help each other 
in the lifting of the iron. 


Why the rotation of an iron wheel is not hindered by the magnet 
from which it is hung. 


How and why the power of one magnet increases or decreases the 
power of another. 


. Why a magnet, however strong, cannot pull iron from a weaker 


magnet if it is not touching the iron. 


Why a weak magnet or iron can, if it touches a piece of iron, drag it 
away from a stronger magnet. 


Why in these northern regions the south pole of a magnet is 
stronger than the north pole. 


What can be observed if iron filings are scattered round a magnet. 


Why an iron plate sticking to the pole of a magnet reduces its 
power of attracting or turning iron. 


. Why this power is not reduced when any other body is interposed. 


. Why the unsuitable position of a magnet gradually diminishes its 


strength. 


. Why rust, humidity and damp diminish its strength, and a vigorous 


fire completely destroys it. 


. The force of attraction in amber, wax, resin and similar things. 
. The cause of this attraction in glass. 
. The same cause can be observed in other cases too. 


. From what has been said we can understand the possible causes of 


all the other remarkable effects which are usually attributed to 
occult qualities. 


... Consider how amazing are the properties of magnets and of fire, and 
how different they are from the properties we commonly observe in other 


Part Four 279 


bodies: how a huge flame can be kindled from a tiny spark in a moment 
<when it falls on a large quantity of powder>, and how great its power 
is; or how the fixed stars radiate their light <instantly> in every 
direction over such an enormous distance. In this book I have deduced 
the causes — which | believe to be quite evident — of these and many other 
phenomena from principles which are known to all and admitted by all, 
namely the shape, size, position and motion of particles of matter. And 
anyone who considers all this will readily be convinced that there are no 
powers in stones and plants that are so mysterious, and no marvels 
attributed to sympathetic and antipathetic influences that are so asto- 
nishing, that they cannot be explained in this way. In short, there is 
nothing in the whole of nature (nothing, that is, which should be referred 
to purely corporeal causes, i.e. those devoid of thought and mind) which 
is incapable of being deductively explained on the basis of these selfsame 
principles; and hence it is quite unnecessary to add any further principles 
to the list. 


188. What must be borrowed from [my proposed] treatises on animals 

and on man in order to complete our knowledge of material things. 
I would not add anything further to this fourth part of the Principles of 
Philosophy if, as | originally planned, | was going on to write two further 
parts — a fifth part on living things, i.e. animals and plants, and a sixth 
part on man. But I am not yet completely clear about all the matters 
which I would like to deal with there, and I do not know whether I shall 
ever have enough free time to complete these sections. So, to avoid 
delaying the publication of the first four parts any longer, and to make 
sure there are no gaps caused by my keeping material back for the two 
final parts, I shall here add a few observations concerning the objects of 
the senses. Up till now I have described this earth and indeed the whole 
visible universe as if it were a machine: I have considered only the various 
shapes and movements of its parts. But our senses show us much else 
besides — namely colours, smells, sounds and such-like; and if I were to 
say nothing about these it might be thought that I had left out the most 
important part of the explanation of the things in nature. 


189. What sensation is and how it operates. 
It must be realized that the human soul, while informing! the entire body, 
nevertheless has its principal seat in the brain; it is here alone that the 


1 Lat. informare. Descartes occasionally employs this standard scholastic term, though of 
course he rejects the Aristotelian account of the soul as the ‘form’ of the body. The 
French version has simply ‘while being united to the entire body’. 


315 


316 


317 


280 Principles of Philosophy 


soul not only understands and imagines but also has sensory awareness. 
Sensory awareness comes about by means of nerves, which stretch like 
threads from the brain to all the limbs, and are joined together in such a 
way that hardly any part of the human body can be touched without 
producing movement in several of the nerve-ends that are scattered around 
in that area. This movement is then transmitted to the other ends of the 
nerves which are all grouped together in the brain around the seat of the 
soul, as I explained very fully in Chapter Four of the Optics.' The result 
of these movements being set up in the brain by the nerves is that the soul 
or mind that is closely joined to the brain is affected in various ways, 
corresponding to the various different sorts of movements. And the 
various different states of mind, or thoughts, which are the immediate 
result of these movements are called sensory perceptions, or in ordinary 
speech, sensations. 


190. Various kinds of sensation. First, internal sensations, i.e. emotional 
states of the mind and natural appetites. 
The wide variety in sensations is a result, firstly, of differences in the 
nerves themselves, and secondly of differences in the sorts of motion 
which occur in particular nerves. It is not that each individual nerve 
produces a particular kind of sensation; indeed, there are only seven 
principal groups of nerves, of which two have to do with internal 
sensations and five with external sensations. The nerves which go to the 
stomach, oesophagus, throat, and other internal parts whose function is 
to keep our natural wants supplied, produce one kind of internal 
sensation, which is called ‘natural appetite’ <e.g. hunger and thirst>. 
The nerves which go to the heart and the surrounding area <including 
the diaphragm>, despite their very small size, produce another kind of 
internal sensation which comprises all the disturbances or passions and 
emotions of the mind such as joy, sorrow, love, hate and so on. For 
example, when the blood has the right consistency so that it expands in 
the heart more readily than usual, it relaxes the nerves scattered around 
the openings, and sets up a movement which leads to a subsequent 
movement in the brain producing a natural feeling of joy in the mind; 
and other causes produce the same sort of movement in these tiny nerves, 
thereby giving the same feeling of joy. Thus, if we imagine ourselves 
enjoying some good, the act of imagination does not itself contain the 
feeling of joy, but it causes the spirits? to travel from the brain to the 
muscles in which these nerves are embedded. This causes the openings of 


1 Optics, above pp. 164ff; Cf. Treatise on Man, above pp. 1ooff; Passions, below 


pp. 340ff. 
2 I.e. the so-called ‘animal spirits’; Cf. Passions, below, pp. 330ff. 


Part Four 281 


the heart to expand, and this in turn produces the movement in the tiny 
nerves of the heart which must result in the feeling of joy. In the same 
way, when we hear good news, it is first of all the mind which makes a 
judgement about it and rejoices with that intellectual joy which occurs 
without any bodily disturbance and which, for that reason, the Stoics 
allowed that the man of wisdom could experience <although they 
required him to be free of all passion>. But later on, when the good news 
is pictured in the imagination, the spirits flow from the brain to the 
muscles around the heart and move the tiny nerves there, thereby causing 
a movement in the brain which produces in the mind a feeling of animal 
joy. Or again, if the blood is too thick and flows sluggishly into the 
ventricles of the heart and does not expand enough inside it, it produces a 
different movement in the same small nerves around the heart; when this 
movement is transmitted to the brain it produces a feeling of sadness in 
the mind, although the mind itself may perhaps not know of any reason 
why it should be sad. And there are several other causes capable of 
producing the same feeling <by setting up the same kind of movement in 
these nerves.> Other movements in these tiny nerves produce different 
emotions such as love, hatred, fear, anger and so on; I am here thinking 
of these simply as emotions or passions of the soul, that is, as confused 
thoughts, which the mind does not derive from itself alone but experi- 
ences as a result of something happening to the body with which it is 
closely conjoined. These emotions are quite different in kind from the 
distinct thoughts which we have concerning what is to be embraced or 
desired or shunned. The same applies to the natural appetites such as 
hunger and thirst which depend on the nerves of the stomach, throat and 
so forth: they are completely different from the volition to eat, drink and 
so on. But, because they are frequently accompanied by such volition or 
appetition, they are called appetites. 


191. The external senses. First, the sense of touch. 

As far as the external senses are concerned, five are commonly listed 
corresponding to the five kinds of objects stimulating the sensory nerves, 
and the five kinds of confused thoughts which the resulting motions 
produce in the soul. First of all there are the nerves terminating in the 
skin all over the body.! These nerves may be touched, via the skin, by 
various external bodies; and these bodies, though remaining intact, 
stimulate the nerves in various different ways — in one way by their 
hardness, in another way by their heaviness, in another way by their heat, 


1 ‘First there is the sense of touch, which has as its object all the bodies which can move 
some part of the flesh or skin of our body, and has as its organ all the nerves which are 
found in this part of the body and move with it’ (French version). 


319 


282 Principles of Philosophy 


in another way by their humidity, and so on. Corresponding to the 
different ways in which the nerves are moved, or have their normal 
motion checked, various different sensations are produced in the mind; 
and this is how the various tactile qualities get their names. <We call these 
qualities hardness, heaviness, heat, humidity and so on, but all that is 
meant by these terms is that the external bodies possess what is required 
to bring it about that our nerves excite in the soul the sensations of 
hardness, heaviness, heat etc.>. Moreover, when the nerves are stimulated 
with unusual force, but without any damage being occasioned to the 
body, a pleasurable sensation arises <which is a confused thought in the 
soul and> which is naturally agreeable to the mind because it is a sign of 
robust health in the body with which it is closely conjoined <in so far as it 
can undergo the action causing the pleasure without being damaged>. But 
if there is some bodily damage, there is a sensation of pain <in the soul, 
even though the action causing the pain may be only marginally more 
forceful>. This explains why bodily pleasure and pain arise from such 
very similar objects, although the sensations are completely opposite. 


192. Taste. 

Then there <is the least subtle sense after that of touch, namely taste. Its 
organs> are other nerves scattered through the tongue and neighbouring 
areas. The same external bodies, this time split up into particles and 
floating in the saliva from the mouth, stimulate these nerves in various 
ways corresponding to their many different shapes <sizes or 
movements>, and thus produce the sensations of various tastes. 


193. Smell. 

Thirdly, there <is the sense of smell. Its organs> are two other nerves (or 
appendages to the brain, since they do not go outside the skull) which are 
stimulated by separate particles of the same bodies that float in the air. 
The particles in question cannot be of any kind whatsoever: they must be 
sufficiently light and energetic to be drawn into the nostrils and through 
the pores of the so-called spongy bone, thus reaching the two nerves. The 
various movements of the nerves produce the sensations of various 
smells. 


194. Hearing. 

Fourthly, there <is hearing, whose object is simply various vibrations in 
the ear. For there> are two other nerves, found in the inmost chambers of 
the ears, which receive tremors and vibrations from the whole body of 
surrounding air. When the air strikes the tympanic membrane it produces 
a disturbance in the little chain of three small bones attached to it; and 


Part Four 2.83 


the sensations of different sounds arise from the various different 
movements in these bones. 


195. Sight 

Finally, there are the optic nerves <which are the organs of the most subtle 
of all the senses, that of sight>. The extremities of these nerves, which 
make up the coating inside the eye called the retina, are moved not by air 
or any external bodies entering the eye, but simply by globules of the 
second element <which pass through the pores and all the fluids and 
transparent membranes of the eye>. This is the origin of the sensations of 
light and colours, as I have already explained adequately in the Optics 
and Meteorology.! 


196. The soul has sensory awareness only in so far as it is in 
the brain. 

There is clear proof that the soul’s sensory awareness, via the nerves, of 
what happens to the individual limbs of the body does not come about in 
virtue of the soul’s presence in the individual limbs, but simply in virtue 
of its presence in the brain <or because the nerves by their motions 
transmit to it the actions of external objects which touch the parts of the 
body where the nerves are embedded>. Firstly, there are various diseases 
which affect only the brain but remove or interfere with all sensation. 
Again, sleep occurs only in the brain, yet every day it deprives us of a 
great part of our sensory faculties, though these are afterwards restored 
on waking. Next, when the brain is undamaged, if there is an obstruction 
in the paths by which the nerves reach the brain from the external limbs, 
this alone is enough to destroy sensation in those limbs. Lastly, we 
sometimes feel pain in certain limbs even though there is nothing to cause 
pain in the limbs themselves; the cause of the pain lies in the other areas 
through which the nerves travel in their journey from the limbs to the 
brain. This last point can be proved by countless observations, but it will 
suffice to mention one here. A girl with a seriously infected hand used to 
have her eyes bandaged whenever the surgeon visited her, to prevent her 
being upset by the surgical instruments. After a few days her arm was 
amputated at the elbow because of a creeping gangrene, and wads of 
bandages were put in its place so that she was quite unaware that she had 
lost her arm. However she continued to complain of pains, now in one 
then in another finger of the amputated hand. The only possible reason 
for this is that the nerves which used to go from the brain down to the 
hand now terminated in the arm near the elbow, and were being agitated 


1 Cf. Optics, above pp. 167ff. 


320 


284 Principles of Philosophy 


by the same sorts of motion as must previously have been set up in the 
hand, so as to produce in the soul, residing in the brain, the sensation of 
pain in this or that finger. <And this shows clearly that pain in the hand 
is felt by the soul not because it is present in the hand but because it is 
present in the brain.> 


197. The nature of the mind is such that various sensations can be 
produced in it simply by motions in the body. 
It can also be proved that the nature of our mind is such that the mere 
occurrence of certain motions in the body can stimulate it to have all 
manner of thoughts which have no likeness to the movements in 
question. This is especially true of the confused thoughts we call 
sensations or feelings. For we see that spoken or written words excite all 
sorts of thoughts and emotions in our minds. With the same paper, pen 
321 and ink, if the tip of the pen is pushed across the paper in a certain way it 
will form letters which excite in the mind of the reader thoughts of 
battles, storms and violence, and emotions of indignation and sorrow; 
but if the movements of the pen are just slightly different they will 
produce quite different thoughts of tranquillity, peace and pleasure, and 
quite opposite emotions of love and joy. It may be objected that speech or 
writing does not immediately excite in the mind any emotions, or images 
of things apart from the words themselves; it merely occasions various 
acts of understanding which afterwards result in the soul’s constructing 
within itself the images of various things. But what then will be said of 
the sensations of pain and pleasure? A sword strikes our body and cuts it; 
but the ensuing pain is completely different from the local motion of the 
sword or of the body that is cut — as different as colour or sound or smell 
or taste. We clearly see, then, that the sensation of pain is excited in us 
merely by the local motion of some parts of our body in contact with 
another body; so we may conclude that the nature of our mind is such 
that it can be subject to all the other sensations merely as a result of other 
local motions. 


198. By means of our senses we apprehend nothing in external objects 
beyond their shapes, sizes and motions. 
Moreover, we observe no differences between the various nerves which 
would support the view that different nerves allow different things to be 
transmitted to the brain from the external sense organs; indeed, we are 
not entitled to say that anything reaches the brain except for the local 
motion of the nerves themselves. And we see that this local motion 
produces not only sensations of pain and pleasure but also those of light 
322 and sound. If someone is struck in the eye, so that the vibration of the 


Part Four 2.85 


blow reaches the retina, this will cause him to see many sparks of flashing 
light, yet the light is not outside his eye. And if someone puts a finger in 
his ear he will hear a throbbing hum which comes simply from the 
movement of air trapped in the ear. Finally, let us consider heat and other 
qualities perceived by the senses, in so far as those qualities are in objects, 
as well as the forms of purely material things, for example the form of 
fire: we often see these arising from the local motion of certain bodies 
and producing in turn other local motions in other bodies. Now we 
understand very well how the different size, shape and motion of the 
particles of one body can produce various local motions in another body. 
But there is no way of understanding how these same attributes (size, 
shape and motion) can produce something else whose nature is quite 
different from their own — like the substantial forms and real qualities 
which many <philosophers> suppose to inhere in things; and we cannot 
understand how these qualities or forms could have the power subse- 
quently to produce local motions in other bodies. Not only is all this 
unintelligible, but we know that the nature of our soul is such that 
different local motions are quite sufficient to produce all the sensations in 
the soul. What is more, we actually experience the various sensations as 
they are produced in the soul, and we do not find that anything reaches 
the brain from the external sense organs except for motions of this kind. 
In view of all this we have every reason to conclude that the properties in 
external objects to which we apply the terms light, colour, smell, taste, 
sound, heat and cold — as well as the other tactile qualities and even what 
are called ‘substantial forms’ — are, so far as we can see, simply various 
dispositions in those objects! which make them able to set up various 
kinds of motions in our nerves <which are required to produce all the 
various sensations in our soul>. 


199. There is no phenomenon of nature which has been overlooked in 
this treatise. 

A simple enumeration will make it clear that there is no phenomenon of 
nature which I have omitted to consider in this treatise. For a list of 
natural phenomena cannot include anything which is not apprehended 
by the senses. Now I have given an account of the various sizes, shapes 
and motions which are to be found in all bodies; and apart from these the 
only things which we perceive by our senses as being located outside us 
are light, colour, smell, taste, sound and tactile qualities. And I have just 
demonstrated that these are nothing else in the objects — or at least we 
cannot apprehend them as being anything else — but certain dispositions 
depending on size, shape and motion. <So the entire visible world, in so 


1 ‘... in the shapes, sizes, positions and movements of their parts’ (French version). 


323 


324 


286 Principles of Philosophy 


far as it is simply visible or perceivable by the senses, contains nothing 
apart from the things I have given an account of here.> 


200. I have used no principles in this treatise which are not accepted by 
everyone; this philosophy is nothing new but is extremely old and 
very common. 

I should also like it to be noted that in attempting to explain the general 
nature of material things I have not employed any principle which was 
not accepted by Aristotle and all other philosophers of every age. So this 
philosophy is not new, but the oldest and most common of all. I have 
considered the shapes, motions and sizes of bodies and examined the 
necessary results of their mutual interaction in accordance with the laws 
of mechanics, which are confirmed by reliable everyday experience. And 
who has ever doubted that bodies move and have various sizes and 
shapes, and that their various different motions correspond to these 
differences in size and shape; or who doubts that when bodies collide 
bigger bodies are divided into many smaller ones and change their 
shapes? We detect these facts not just with one sense but several — sight, 
touch and hearing; and they can also be distinctly imagined and 
understood by us. But the same cannot be said of the other characteristics 
like colour, sound and the rest, each of which is perceived not by several 
senses but by one alone; for the images of them which we have in our 
thought are always confused, and we do not know what they really are. 


201. There are corporeal particles which cannot be perceived by the 
senses. 

I do consider, however, that there are many particles in each body which 
are <so small that they are> not perceived with any of our senses; and this 
may not meet with the approval of those who take their own senses as the 
measure of what can be known. <But to desire that our human reasoning 
should go no further than what we can see is, I think, to do it a great 
injustice.> Yet who can doubt that there are many bodies so minute that 
we do not detect them by any of our senses? One simply has to consider 
something which is slowly growing or shrinking and ask what it is that is 
being added or taken away hour by hour. A tree grows day by day; and it 
is unintelligible to suppose that it gets bigger than it was before unless we 
understand there to be some body which is added to it. But who has ever 
detected with the senses the minute bodies that are added to a growing 
tree in one day? It must be admitted, at least by those <philosophers> who 
accept that quantity is indefinitely divisible, that its parts could be made 
so tiny as to be imperceptible by any of the senses. And it certainly should 
not be surprising that we are unable to perceive very minute bodies 


Part Four 287 


through our senses. For our nerves, which must be set in motion by 
objects in order to produce a sensation, are not themselves very minute, 
but are like small cords made up of many smaller particles; hence they 
cannot be set in motion by very minute bodies. No one who uses his 
reason will, I think, deny the advantage of using what happens in large 
bodies, as perceived by our senses, as a model for our ideas about what 
happens in tiny bodies which elude our senses merely because of their 
small size. This is much better than explaining matters by inventing all 
sorts of strange objects which have no resemblance to what is perceived 
by the senses <such as ‘prime matter’, ‘substantial forms’ and the whole 
range of qualities that people habitually introduce, all of which are 
harder to understand than the things they are supposed to explain>. 


202. The philosophy of Democritus differs from my own just as much as 
it does from the standard view <of Aristotle and others>. 
It is true that Democritus also imagined certain small bodies having 
various sizes, shapes and motions, and supposed that all bodies that can 
be perceived by the senses arose from the conglomeration and mutual 
interaction of these corpuscles; and yet his method of philosophizing 
generally meets with total rejection. This rejection, however, has never 
been based on the fact that his philosophy deals with certain particles so 
minute as to elude the senses, and assigns various sizes, shapes and 
motions to them; for no one can doubt that there are in fact many such 
particles, as I have just shown. The reasons for the rejection are the 
following. First, Democritus supposed his corpuscles to be indivisible — a 
notion which leads me to join those who reject his philosophy. Secondly, 
he imagined there to be a vacuum around the corpuscles, whereas | 
demonstrate the impossibility of a vacuum. Thirdly, he attributed gravity 
to these corpuscles, whereas my understanding is that there is no such 
thing as gravity in any body taken on its own, but that it exists only as a 
function of, and in relation to, the position and motion of other bodies.! 
And lastly, Democritus did not show how particular things arose merely 
from the interaction of corpuscles; or, if he did show this in some cases, 
his explanations were not entirely consistent, if we may judge from those 
of his opinions which have survived. I leave others to judge whether my 
own writings on philosophy have up to now been reasonably consistent 
<and sufficiently fertile in the results that can be deduced from them. As 
for the consideration of shapes, sizes and motions, this is something that 
has been adopted not only by Democritus but also by Aristotle and all the 
other philosophers. Now I reject all of Democritus’ suppositions, with 


1 See above, Part 2, art. 20; Part 4, art. 20-3. 


325 


326 


288 Principles of Philosophy 


this one exception, and I also reject practically all the suppositions of 
the other philosophers. Hence it is clear that my method of philosophiz- 
ing has no more affinity with the Democritean method than with any of 
the other particular sects>. 


203. How we may arrive at knowledge of the shapes <sizes> and 
motions of particles that cannot be perceived by the senses. 

In view of the fact that I assign determinate shapes, sizes, and motions to 
the imperceptible particles of bodies just as if I had seen them, but 
nonetheless maintain that they cannot be perceived, some people may be 
led to ask how I know what these particles are like. My reply is this. First 
of all <I considered in general all the clear and distinct notions which our 
understanding can contain with regard to material things. And I found 
no others except for the notions we have of shapes, sizes and motions, 
and the rules in accordance with which these three things can be modified 
by each other — rules which are the principles of geometry and mecha- 
nics. And I judged as a result that all the knowledge which men have of 
the natural world must necessarily be derived from these notions; for all 
the other notions we have of things that can be perceived by the senses 
are confused and obscure, and so cannot serve to give us knowledge of 
anything outside ourselves, but may even stand in the way of such 
knowledge. Next> I took the simplest and best known principles, 
knowledge of which is naturally implanted in our minds; and working 
from these I considered, in general terms, firstly, what are the principal 
differences which can exist between the sizes, shapes and positions of 
bodies which are imperceptible by the senses merely because of their 
small size, and, secondly, what observable effects would result from their 
various interactions. Later on, when I observed just such effects in objects 
that can be perceived by the senses, I judged that they in fact arose from 
just such an interaction of bodies that cannot be perceived — especially 
since it seemed impossible to think up any other explanation for them. In 
this matter I was greatly helped by considering artefacts. For I do not 
recognize any difference between artefacts and natural bodies except that 
the operations of artefacts are for the most part performed by mechan- 
isms which are large enough to be easily perceivable by the senses — as 
indeed must be the case if they are to be capable of being manufactured 
by human beings. The effects produced in nature, by contrast, almost 
always depend on structures which are so minute that they completely 
elude our senses. Moreover, mechanics is a division or special case 
of physics, and all the explanations belonging to the former also 
belong to the latter; so it is no less natural for a clock constructed with 
this or that set of wheels to tell the time than it is for a tree which grew 
from this or that seed to produce the appropriate fruit. Men who are 


Part Four 289 


experienced in dealing with machinery can take a particular machine 
whose function they know and, by looking at some of its parts, easily 
form a conjecture about the design of the other parts, which they cannot 
see. In the same way I have attempted to consider the observable effects 
and parts of natural bodies and track down the imperceptible causes and 
particles which produce them. 


204. With regard to the things which cannot be perceived by the senses, it 
is enough to explain their possible nature, even though their actual 
nature may be different <and this is all that Aristotle tried to do>. 

However, although this method may enable us to understand how all the 
things in nature could have arisen, it should not therefore be inferred that 
they were in fact made in this way. Just as the same craftsman could 
make two clocks which tell the time equally well and look completely 
alike from the outside but have completely different assemblies of wheels 
inside, so the supreme craftsman of the real world could have produced 
all that we see in several different ways. I am very happy to admit this; 
and I shall think I have achieved enough provided only that what I have 
written is such as to correspond accurately with all the phenomena of 
nature. This will indeed be sufficient for application in ordinary life, since 
medicine and mechanics, and all the other arts which can be fully 
developed with the help of physics, are directed only towards items that 
can be perceived by the senses and are therefore to be counted among the 
phenomena of nature.! And in case anyone happens to be convinced that 
Aristotle achieved — or wanted to achieve — any more than this, he 
himself expressly asserts in the first book of the Meteorologica, at the 
beginning of Chapter Seven, that when dealing with things not manifest 
to the senses, he reckons he has provided adequate reasons and demon- 
strations if he can simply show that such things are capable of occurring 
in accordance with his explanations. 


205. Nevertheless my explanations appear to be at least morally certain’. 
It would be disingenuous, however, not to point out that some things are 
considered as morally certain, that is, as having sufficient certainty for 


1 *...are directed simply towards applying certain observable bodies to each other in such 
a way that certain observable effects are produced as a result of natural causes. And by 
imagining what the various causes are, and considering their results, we shall achieve our 
aim irrespective of whether these imagined causes are true or false, since the result is 
taken to be no different, as far as the observable effects are concerned’ (French version). 

2 By ‘moral certainty’ is meant certainty sufficient for ordinary practical purposes. See first 
sentence of this article, where the French version runs: ‘... moral certainty is certainty 
which is sufficient to regulate our behaviour, or which measures up to the certainty we 
have on matters relating to the conduct of life which we never normally doubt, though 
we know that it is possible, absolutely speaking, that they may be false’. 


327 


328 


290 Principles of Philosophy 


application to ordinary life, even though they may be uncertain in 
relation to the absolute power of God. <Thus those who have never been 
in Rome have no doubt that it is a town in Italy, even though it could be 
the case that everyone who has told them this has been deceiving them.> 
Suppose for example that someone wants to read a letter written in Latin 
but encoded so that the letters of the alphabet do not have their proper 
value, and he guesses that the letter B should be read whenever A 
appears, and C when B appears, i.e. that each letter should be replaced by 
the one immediately following it. If, by using this key, he can make up 
Latin words from the letters, he will be in no doubt that the true meaning 
of the letter is contained in these words. It is true that his knowledge is 
based merely on a conjecture, and it is conceivable that the writer did not 
replace the original letters with their immediate successors in the 
alphabet, but with others, thus encoding quite a different message; but 
this possibility is so unlikely <especially if the message contains many 
words> that it does not seem credible. Now if people look at all the many 
properties relating to magnetism, fire and the fabric of the entire world, 
which I have deduced in this book from just a few principles, then, even if 
they think that my assumption of these principles was arbitrary and 
groundless, they will still perhaps acknowledge that it would hardly have 
been possible for so many items to fit into a coherent pattern if the 
original principles had been false. 


206. Indeed, my explanations possess more than moral certainty. 

Besides, there are some matters, even in relation to the things in nature, 
which we regard as absolutely, and more than just morally, certain. 
<Absolute certainty arises when we believe that it is wholly impossible 
that something should be otherwise than we judge it to be.> This certainty 
is based on a metaphysical foundation, namely that God is supremely 
good and in no way a deceiver, and hence that the faculty which he gave 
us for distinguishing truth from falsehood cannot lead us into error, so 
long as we are using it properly and are thereby perceiving something 
distinctly. Mathematical demonstrations have this kind of certainty,! as 
does the knowledge that material things exist; and the same goes for all 
evident reasoning about material things. And perhaps even these results 
of mine will be allowed into the class of absolute certainties, if people 
consider how they have been deduced in an unbroken chain from the first 
and simplest principles of human knowledge. Their certainty will be 


329 especially appreciated if it is properly understood that we can have no 


1 ‘... for we see clearly that it is impossible that two and three added together should 
make more or less than five; or that a square should have only three sides, and so on’ 
(added in French version). 


Part Four 291 


sensory awareness of external objects unless these objects produce some 
local motion in our nerves; and that the fixed stars, owing to their 
enormous distance from us, cannot produce such motion unless there is 
also some motion occurring both in them and also throughout the entire 
intervening part of the heavens.’ Once this is accepted, then it seems that 
all the other phenomena, or at least the general features of the universe 
and the earth which I have described, can hardly be intelligibly explained 
except in the way I have suggested. 


207. I submit all my views to the authority of the Church. 
Nevertheless, mindful of my own weakness, I make no firm pronounce- 
ments, but submit all these opinions to the authority of the Catholic 
Church and the judgement of those wiser than myself. And I would not 
wish anyone to believe anything except what he is convinced of by 
evident and irrefutable reasoning. 


THE END 


1 ‘... from which it follows very evidently that the heavens must be fluid, i.e. composed of 
small particles which move separately from each other, or at least that they must contain 
such particles. For whatever I can be said to have assumed in Part 3, art. 46 can be 
reduced to the sole assertion that the heavens are fluid’ (added in French version). 


AT VIIIB 


COMMENTS ON A CERTAIN BROADSHEET 


341 published in Belgium towards the end of 1647, entitled ‘An 


342 


343 


account of the human mind, or rational soul, which explains 
what it is and what it can be’ 


A few days ago I received two pamphlets attacking me, the one openly 
and directly, the other covertly and indirectly. I am quite unconcerned 
about the former;! I am even grateful to the author, for the result of his 
grotesque efforts is simply a heap of worthless quibbles and slanders 
which no one could believe — a result which bears witness to the fact that 
he was unable to find in my writings anything which he could justly 
censure. Thus, in criticizing my writings he has confirmed their truth 
more effectively than he would have done by praising them — and all at 
the expense of his own reputation. The other work contains nothing that 
openly refers to me; it is published anonymously, and without the 
name of the printer. Neverthless, it troubles me more, for it expresses 
opinions which I judge to be positively harmful and mistaken. It is issued 
in the form of a broadsheet which can be fixed to church doors, and may 
thus strike the eye of any chance reader. It is said, moreover, that in an 
earlier printing of the sheet, in a slightly different format, a certain 
individual was named as the author — one who is regarded by many as 
propounding doctrines identical to my own. I am forced, therefore, to 
expose his errors, so that they will not be attributed to me by those who 
come across these papers without having read my own writings. 
The following is the broadsheet in its latest form. 


AN ACCOUNT OF THE HUMAN MIND, OR RATIONAL SOUL, 
WHICH EXPLAINS WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT CAN BE 


(1) The human mind is that by means of which man immediately performs acts 
of thinking. It consists solely in the faculty, or inner principle, of thinking. 

(2) So far as the nature of things is concerned, the possibility seems to be open 
that the mind can be either a substance or a mode of a corporeal substance. Or, if 
we are to follow some philosophers, who hold that extension and thought are 
attributes which are present in certain substances, as in subjects, then since these 
attributes are not opposites but merely different, there is no reason why the mind 
1 Consideratio Theologica, Jacques de Rives (Jacobus Revius), 1648. 

2 The broadsheet published anonymously by Henri de Roy (Regius). See Translator’s 

preface. 


294 


Comments on a Certain Broadsheet 295 


should not be a sort of attribute co-existing with extension in the same subject, 
though the one attribute is not included in the concept of the other. For whatever 
we can conceive of can exist. Now, it is conceivable that the mind is some such 
item; for none of these implies a contradiction. Therefore it is possible that the 
mind is some such item. 

(3) ‘Thus, those who assert that we clearly and distinctly conceive the human 
mind as necessarily (or actually)! and really distinct from the body are mistaken. 
(4) In many passages in Holy Scripture, however, it is revealed that the mind is 
nothing but a substance or entity which is really distinct from the body, is 
actually separable from it, and is capable of existing on its own apart from the 
body. So this fact, which some people may find doubtful by nature (if we are 
seeking exact, as distinct from merely probable, truth and knowledge)’ is for us, 
through its divine revelation in Scripture, now beyond doubt. 

(5) The fact that we can have doubts about the existence of the body, but never 
about the existence of the mind, is no objection. For this just goes to show that, so 
long as we have doubts about the existence of the body, we cannot say that the 
mind is a mode of the body. 

(6) The human mind is a substance really distinct from the body; nevertheless, so 
long as it is in the body, it is organic in all its actions. Thus, as the disposition of 
the body varies, so the mind has different thoughts. 

(7) Since the mind is by nature different from the body and from the disposition 
of the body, and cannot arise from this disposition, it is incorruptible. 

(8) Since, in our conception of it, the mind has no parts or any extension, it is 
pointless asking whether it exists as a whole in the whole body, or as a whole in 
the individual parts of the body. 

(9) The mind can be affected by imaginary things just as much as by real things; 
hence, if we are seeking not merely probable, but precise and exact knowledge of 
reality,’ it is by nature doubtful whether any bodies are really perceived by us. 
Nevertheless, the divine revelation of Scripture removes even this doubt, and 
shows it to be indubitable that God created heaven and earth and everything in 
them, and keeps them in existence even now. 

(10) The bond which keeps the soul conjoined with the body is the law of the 
immutability of nature, according to which everything remains in its present state 
so long as it is not disturbed by anything else. 

(11) Since the mind is a substance which is newly created in the process of 
generation, the correct view seems to be that the rational soul is brought into 
existence by God during this process, through an immediate act of creation. 
(12) The mind has no need of ideas, or notions, or axioms which are innate: its 
faculty of thinking is all it needs for performing its own acts. 

(13) Thus all common notions which are engraved in the mind have their origin 
in observation of things or in verbal instruction. 


1 The phrase in brackets is contained as a footnote to the first edition of the Comments 
(1648). 

2 The clause in brackets is contained as a footnote to the first edition of the Comments. 

3 The clause, ‘if we are ... reality’, is contained in a footnote to the first edition. 


344 


345 


346 


347 


296 Comments on a Certain Broadsheet 


(14) Even the idea of God which is implanted in the mind has its origin either in 
divine revelation, or in verbal instruction, or in observation of things. 
(15) Our concept of God, or the idea of God which is present in our mind, does 
not in itself constitute a very strong argument for proving the existence of God, 
for it is not the case that everything of which we have an explicit conception 
exists; and the idea of God, in so far as we have such a conception (and an 
imperfect one at that), no more transcends our characteristic powers of thinking 
than the concept of any other thing whatever. 
(16) The mind has two different sorts of thought: intellect and volition. 
(17) Intellect comprises perception and judgement. 
(18) Perception comprises sense-perception, memory, and imagination. 
(19) Sense-perception consists entirely in the perception of some corporeal 
motion, which requires no intentional forms;!' it takes place not in the external 
sense organs, but in the brain alone. 
(20) The will is free and, in the case of natural things, is indifferent as between 
Opposites — as we know from our own inner awareness. 
(21) The will is self-determining, and should no more be said to be blind than 
vision should be said to be deaf. 

‘No one acquires a great reputation for piety more easily than the superstitious 
or hypocritical person.” 


AN EXAMINATION OF THE BROADSHEET 


Comments on the title 

I notice that in the title we are promised not just bald assertions about the 
rational soul, but an explanation of it. We must suppose, then, that the 
broadsheet contains all the arguments — or at any rate the main ones — 
which the author had, not only for proving, but also for explicating, his 
assertions, and that no other arguments are to be expected from him. I 
approve of his calling the rational soul the ‘human mind’, for by using 
this expression he avoids the ambiguity in the term ‘soul’, and he is 
following me in this respect. 


Comments on the individual articles 

In the first article his intention seems to be to provide a definition of the 
rational soul; but his definition is imperfect, for he fails to specify its 
genus, i.e. to say whether it is a substance, or a mode, or something else. 
He gives only the differentia, which he has taken from me, for as far as I 
know, no one before me has stated that the rational soul consists solely in 
thought, that is, in the faculty of thinking or the internal principle by 
means of which we think. 


1 See footnote 1, p. 154 above. 
2 Quoted from Descartes’ dedicatory letter to Princess Elizabeth in the Principles. See 
above, p. 191. 


Comments on a Certain Broadsheet 297 


In the second article he begins by asking what the genus of the rational 
soul is, and says ‘The nature of things seems to leave open the possibility 
that the human mind is either a substance or a mode of a corporeal 
substance.’ 

This assertion involves a contradiction, just as much as if he had said 
‘The nature of things leaves open the possibility that a mountain exists 
either with or without a valley.” We must of course distinguish between 
on the one hand things which by their very nature are susceptible of 
change — such as the fact that at present I am writing or not writing as the 
case may be, or the fact that one person is prudent, another imprudent — 
and on the other hand things which never change, such as everything 
which belongs to the essence of something (as philosophers generally 
acknowledge). It can undoubtedly be said of contingent items that the 
nature of things leaves open the possibility that they may be either in one 
state or in a different state. For example, at present I may be either 
writing or not writing. But when it is a question of the essence of 
something, it would be quite foolish and self-contradictory to say that the 
nature of things leaves open the possibility that the essence of something 
may have a different character from the one it actually has. The 
impossibility of existing without a valley is part of the nature of a 
mountain; and it belongs just as much to the nature of the human mind 
that it is what it is, viz. that it is a substance (if it is a substance), or a 
mode of a corporeal thing (if such it is). Our author tries to convince us 
on this score, and to prove his point he adds the words, ‘or if we are to 
follow some philosophers’. In the expression ‘some philosophers’ he is 
obviously referring to me, for I am the first to have regarded thought as 
the principal attribute of an incorporeal substance, and extension as the 
principal attribute of a corporeal substance.! But I did not say that these 
attributes are present in the substances as in subjects distinct from them. 
We must take care here not to understand the word ‘attribute’ to mean 
simply ‘mode’, for we term an ‘attribute’ whatever we recognize as being 
naturally ascribable to something, whether it be a mode which is 
susceptible of change, or the absolutely immutable essence of the thing in 
question. Thus God has many attributes, but no modes. Again, one of the 
attributes of any substance is its subsisting on its own. The extension of a 
body, moreover, may take on various different modes: a body’s being 
spherical constitutes one mode, being square a different mode. But 
considered in itself, the extension itself — the subject of these modes — is 
not a mode of the corporeal substance, but an attribute which constitutes 
its natural essence. Lastly there are various modes of thought, for 


1 Cf. Principles, Part 1, art. §3: p. 210 above. 


348 


349 


350 


298 Comments on a Certain Broadsheet 


affirmation is a different mode of thinking from denial, and so on. But 
thought itself, as the internal principle from which these modes spring 
and in which they are present, is not conceived as a mode, but as an 
attribute which constitutes the nature of a substance. Whether this 
substance is corporeal or incorporeal is the question at issue here. 

He adds ‘these attributes are not opposites, but merely different’. 
Again there is a contradiction in this statement. For, when the question 
concerns attributes which constitute the essence of some substances, 
there can be no greater opposition between them than the fact that they 
are different; and when he acknowledges that the one attribute is 
different from the other, this is tantamount to saying that the one 
attribute is not the other; but ‘is’ and ‘is not’ are contraries. He says ‘since 
they are not opposites but merely different, there is no reason why the 
mind should not be a sort of attribute co-existing with extension in the 
same subject, though the one attribute is not included in the concept of 
the other’.! There is a manifest contradiction in this statement, for the 
author is taking something which can hold strictly speaking only for 
modes and inferring that it holds for any attribute whatsoever; but he 
nowhere proves that the mind, or the internal principle of thought, is 
such a mode. On the contrary, I shall presently show that it is not, on the 
basis of what he actually says in article five. As for the attributes which 
constitute the natures of things, it cannot be said that those which are 
different, and such that the concept of the one is not contained in the 
concept of the other, are present together in one and the same subject; for 
that would be equivalent to saying that one and the same subject has two 
different natures — a statement that implies a contradiction, at least when 
it is a question of a simple subject (as in the present case) rather than a 
composite one. 

Three points should be borne in mind here. If the author had properly 
understood them, he would never have fallen into such manifest errors. 

First, it is part of the nature of a mode that, although we can readily 
understand a substance apart from a mode, we cannot vice versa clearly 
understand a mode unless at the same time we have a conception of the 
substance of which it is a mode (as I explained in the Principles, Part 1, 
article 61).2 All philosophers are agreed on this point. But it is clear from 
his fifth article that our author has paid no attention to this rule, for he 
admits there that we can have doubts about the existence of the body, 
whereas we have no doubts about the existence of the mind. It follows 
from this that we can understand the mind apart from the body; hence it 
is not a mode of the body. 


1 Art. 2, p. 294 above. 2 See p. 214 above. 


Comments on a Certain Broadsheet 299 


Second, I wish at this point to stress the difference between simple 
entities and composite entities. A composite entity is one which is found 
to have two or more attributes, each one of which can be distinctly 
understood apart from the other. For, in virtue of the fact that one of 
these attributes can be distinctly understood apart from the other, we 
know that the one is not a mode of the other, but is a thing, or attribute 
of a thing, which can subsist without the other. A simple entity, on the 
other hand, is one in which no such attributes are to be found. It is clear 
from this that a subject which we understand to possess solely extension 
and the various modes of extension is a simple entity; so too is a subject 
which we recognize as having thought and the various modes of thought 
as its sole attribute. But that which we regard as having at the same time 
both extension and thought is a composite entity, namely a man — an 
entity consisting of a soul and a body. Our author seems here to have 
taken a man to be simply a body, of which the man’s mind is a mode. 

Lastly, we should note that in subjects which are composed of several 
substances, one such substance often stands out; and we view this 
substance in such a way that any of the other substances which we 
associate with it are nothing but modes of it. Thus a man who is dressed 
can be regarded as a compound of a man and clothes. But with respect to 
the man, his being dressed is merely a mode, although clothes are 
substances. In the same way, in the case of a man, who is composed of a 
soul and a body, our author might be regarding the body as the principal 
element, in relation to which having a soul or the possession of thought is 
nothing but a mode. But it is absurd to infer from this that the soul itself, 
or that in virtue of which the body thinks, is not a substance distinct from 
the body. 

He endeavours to support his contention by means of the following 
syllogism: ‘Whatever we can conceive of can exist. Now it 1s conceiv- 
able that the mind is some such item (viz. a substance or a mode of a 
corporeal substance); for none of these implies a contradiction. There- 
fore ...’.! We should note that even though the rule, ‘Whatever we can 
conceive of can exist’,* is my own, it is true only so long as we are dealing 
with a conception which is clear and distinct, a conception which 
embraces the possibility of the thing in question, since God can bring 
about whatever we clearly perceive to be possible. But we ought not to 
use this rule heedlessly, because it is easy for someone to imagine that he 
properly understands something when in fact he is blinded by some 
preconception and does not understand it at all. This is just what 
happens when the author maintains that there is no contradiction 


1 Art. 2, p. 294 above. 2 Cf. Med. vi: vol. 1, p. 50. 


351 


35$2 


353 


300 Comments on a Certain Broadsheet 


involved in saying that one and the same thing possesses one or the other 
of two totally different natures, i.e. that it is a substance or a mode. If he 
had merely said that he could see no reason for regarding the human 
mind as an incorporeal substance, rather than a mode of a corporeal 
substance, we could have excused his ignorance. Moreover, if he had said 
that human intelligence could find no reasons which might decisively 
settle the question one way or the other, his arrogance would indeed be 
blameworthy, but his statement would involve no obvious contradiction. 
But when he says that the nature of things leaves open the possibility that 
the same thing is either a substance or a mode,’ what he says is quite 
self-contradictory, and shows how irrational his mind is. 

In the third article he pronounces judgement upon me. For it was I 
who wrote that the human mind can be perceived clearly and distinctly 
as a substance which is distinct from a corporeal substance.” Our author, 
however, proclaims that I am mistaken, though the only arguments he 
has to support him are the ones expounded in the preceding article, and 
these involve a contradiction. But I shall not spend further time on this. 
Nor do I propose to examine the somewhat ambiguous phrase, ‘neces- 
sarily (or actually)’, for it is of no great importance. 

I decline also to examine the views about Holy Scripture expressed in 
the fourth article, as I do not wish to appear to be assuming the right to 
question someone else’s religion. I shall simply say that in this context 
three different sorts of questions should be distinguished. First, some 
things are believed through faith alone — such as the mystery of the 
Incarnation, the Trinity, and the like. Secondly, other questions, while 
having to do with faith, can also be investigated by natural reason: 
among the latter, orthodox theologians usually count the questions of the 
existence of God, and the distinction between the human soul and the 
body. Thirdly, there are questions which have nothing whatever to do 
with faith, and which are the concern solely of human reasoning, such as 
the problem of squaring the circle, or of making gold by the techniques of 
alchemy, and the like. Just as it is an abuse of Scripture to presume to 
solve problems of the third sort on the basis of some mistaken interpreta- 
tion of the Bible, so it diminishes the authority of Scripture to undertake 
to demonstrate questions of the first kind by means of arguments derived 
solely from philosophy. Theologians, however, all contend that it needs 
to be shown that such questions are not incompatible with the natural 
light, and it is principally to this task that they devote their studies. As to 
questions of the second sort, not only do they not regard them as being 
resistant to the natural light, but they even encourage philosophers to 


1 Cf. art. 2, p. 294 above. 2 Cf. Second Replies, prop. 4: vol. 1, p. 119. 


Comments on a Certain Broadsheet 301 


demonstrate them to the best of their ability by arguments which are 
grounded in human reason.! But I have never seen anyone who main- 
tained that the nature of things does not exclude the possibility of 
something’s being in a different state from the one described in Holy 
Scripture, unless his intention was to show indirectly that he had no faith 
in Scripture. For, since we were born men before we became Christians 
we cannot believe that anyone would seriously embrace opinions which 
he thinks contrary to that right reason which constitutes being a man, 
simply in order to cling to the faith which makes him a Christian. But 
perhaps this is not what our author is saying, for his words are: ‘this fact, 
which some people may find doubtful by nature, is for us, through its 
divine revelation in scripture, now beyond doubt’.? In this statement I 
find a double contradiction. The first one lies in his supposition that the 
essence of one and the same thing is, by nature, doubtful, and hence is 
subject to change, for it is self-contradictory that the essence of some- 
thing does not always remain the same — the supposition that it changes 
entails that the thing in question will be a different thing, and will require 
a different name. The second contradiction lies in the words ‘some 
people’, for, owing to the fact that nature is the same for everyone, what 
can be doubtful only for some is not by nature doubtful. 

The fifth article should be related to the second rather than the fourth, 
for in it the author is not concerned with divine revelation, but with the 
nature of the mind — with the question whether it is a substance or a 
mode. In order to show that it is possible to defend the thesis that the 
mind is nothing but a mode, he tries to get round an objection taken from 
my writings. I wrote that we cannot doubt that our mind exists, because 
from the very fact that we are doubting, it follows that our mind exists, 
but for all that, we can doubt whether any bodies exist?. From this I 
concluded and demonstrated that we clearly perceive the mind as an 
existing thing, or substance, even though we have no conception of any 
body whatever and even deny that any bodies exist, and hence that the 
concept of the mind does not in itself involve any concept of body. He 
thinks that he can explode this argument by saying that ‘this just goes to 
show that, so long as we have doubts about the existence of the body, we 
cannot say that the mind is a mode of the body’. He shows here that he is 
utterly ignorant of what it is that philosophers term a ‘mode’. As | 
explained above, the nature of a mode is such that it cannot be 
understood at all unless the concept of the thing of which it is a mode is 
implied in its own concept. Our author admits that the mind can 


1 Cf. Dedicatory Letter to the Meditations: vol. 1, p. 4. 
2 Art. 4, p. 295 above. 3 Cf. Med. vi: vol. 1, p. 54. 


354 


355 


356 


302 Comments on a Certain Broadsheet 


sometimes be understood apart from the body, viz. when there are 
doubts about the existence of the body. It follows from this that, at least 
when such doubts are entertained, the mind cannot be said to be a mode 
of the body. Now what is sometimes true of the essence or nature of 
something is always true of it. Nevertheless the author asserts that ‘the 
nature of things leaves open the possibility that the mind is merely a 
mode of the body’.! These two statements manifestly contradict each 
other. 

In the sixth article I fail to grasp his meaning. I do remember hearing in 
the Schools that ‘the soul is an actuality of the organic body’, but till this 
day I have never heard the soul itself termed ‘organic’. So I beg our 
author’s pardon if I set forth my conjectures, not as true fact, but simply 
as mere conjectures, for I have nothing to say here that is certain. There 
are, I think, two mutually incompatible statements which come to mind: 
one is that the human mind is a substance which is really distinct from 
the body. The author does make this statement quite explicitly, but so far 
as he can, he provides reasons for not accepting it, and contends that it 
can be proved only by the authority of Holy Scripture. The other 
statement is that the same human mind is ‘organic’ or is instrumental in 
all its acts, i.e. it does not perform any actions on its own, but is 
something of which the body makes use, just as it makes use of the 
arrangement’ of its limbs and other corporeal modes. So in fact he 
asserts, though not quite in so many words, that ‘the mind is nothing but 
a mode of the body’, as though he had set the sights of all his arguments 
on this one target. These two statements are so manifestly contradictory 
that I do not think the author intended the reader to accept both at the 
same time; I think he deliberately muddled them together, with the aim 
of satisfying in some way his more simple-minded readers and fellow 
theologians by citing the authority of Scripture, while the more sharp- 
witted of his readers would recognize that he is speaking ironically when 
he says that ‘the mind is distinct from the body’, and that he is entirely of 
the opinion that the mind is nothing but a mode. 

Again, in the seventh and eighth articles, he seems to be speaking 
merely ironically. He employs the same Socratic style in the latter part of 
the ninth article. But in the first part he gives a reason for his assertion, 
and so it seems that we must take him seriously when he says that it is by 
nature doubtful whether any bodies are really perceived by us. His reason 
for this assertion is that ‘the mind can be affected by imaginary things just 


1 Art. 2, p. 294 above. 

2 A scholastic formulation of Artistotle’s definition of the soul as ‘first actuality’ of the 
body. See Aristotle, De Anima, 1, 1, 412427. 

3 Reading conformatio instead of confirmatio, (‘strengthening’), AT. 


Comments on a Certain Broadsheet 303 


as much as by real things’. If this reason is sound, it has to be supposed 
that strictly speaking we cannot make any use of the intellect, but only of 
the faculty which is usually called the ‘common’ sense, the faculty which 
receives the forms! of things, be they real or imaginary, and by way of 
which they affect the mind—a faculty which, philosophers commonly 
admit, animals also possess.2 Of course, we may be affected not only by 
images of real things but also by those which occur in our brain from 
other causes (as happens in sleep); even so, since we possess understand- 
ing and are not made in the same way as a horse or a mule, we distinguish 
by the light of reason between one sort of image and the other with the 
utmost clarity. I have explained in my writings the method of distin- 
guishing correctly and reliably between these two sorts of images, and my 
account is so exact that I am confident that no one who has read it, and is 
capable of understanding it, can possibly be sceptical about it. 

It is possible to suspect that the author is again being ironical in the 
tenth and eleventh articles. If the soul is believed to be a substance, it is 
ridiculous and absurd to say ‘The bond which keeps it conjoined with the 
body is the law of the immutability of nature, according to which 
everything remains in its present state so long as it is not disturbed by 
anything else.’ For, whether things are conjoined or separated, it is 
equally true that they persist in the same state so long as nothing changes 
it. Yet this is not the point at issue here, but rather, how it comes about 
that the mind is conjoined with the body rather than separated from it. If, 
however, the supposition is that the soul is a mode of the body, it is 
correct to say that we need seek no other bond to account for the soul’s 
being joined to the body beyond the fact that it remains in the state in 
which it is, since the ‘state’ of a mode is nothing other than its inhering in 
the thing of which it is a mode. 

In article twelve the author’s disagreement with me seems to be merely 
verbal. When he says that the mind has no need of ideas, or notions, or 
axioms which are innate, while admitting that the mind has the power of 
thinking (presumably natural or innate), he is plainly saying the same 
thing as I, though verbally denying it. I have never written or taken the 
view that the mind requires innate ideas which are something distinct 
from its own faculty of thinking. I did, however, observe that there were 
certain thoughts within me which neither came to me from external objects 
nor were determined by my will, but which came solely from the power 
of thinking within me; so I applied the term ‘innate’ to the ideas or 
notions which are the forms of these thoughts in order to distinguish 
them from others, which I called ‘adventitious’ or ‘made up’.’ This is the 


1 See footnote 1, p. 154 above. 
2 Cf. Med. vi: vol. 11, p. 59, and Rules, p. 41 above. 3 Cf. Med. m1: vol. 1, p. 26. 


357 


358 


359 


304 Comments on a Certain Broadsheet 


same sense as that in which we say that generosity is ‘innate’ in certain 
families, or that certain diseases such as gout or stones are innate in 
others: it is not so much that the babies of such families suffer from these 
diseases in their mother’s womb, but simply that they are born with a 
certain ‘faculty’ or tendency to contract them. 

In article thirteen he draws an extraordinary conclusion from the 
preceding article. Because the mind has no need of innate ideas, its power 
of thinking being sufficient, he says, ‘all common notions which are 
engraved in the mind have their origin in observation of things or in 
verbal instruction’ — as if the power of thinking could achieve nothing on 
its own, could never perceive or think anything except what it receives 
through observation of things or through verbal instruction, i.e. from the 
senses. But this is so far from being true that, on the contrary, if we bear 
well in mind the scope of our senses and what it is exactly that reaches 
our faculty of thinking by way of them, we must admit that in no case are 
the ideas of things presented to us by the senses just as we form them in 
our thinking. So much so that there is nothing in our ideas which is not 
innate to the mind or the faculty of thinking, with the sole exception of 
those circumstances which relate to experience, such as the fact that we 
judge that this or that idea which we now have immediately before our 
mind refers to a certain thing situated outside us. We make such a 
judgement not because these things transmit the ideas to our mind 
through the sense organs, but because they transmit something which, at 
exactly that moment, gives the mind occasion to form these ideas by 
means of the faculty innate to it. Nothing reaches our mind from external 
objects through the sense organs except certain corporeal motions, as our 
author himself asserts in article nineteen, in accordance with my own 
principles. But neither the motions themselves nor the figures arising 
from them are conceived by us exactly as they occur in the sense organs, 
as I have explained at length in my Optics.' Hence it follows that the very 
ideas of the motions themselves and of the figures are innate in us. The 
ideas of pain, colours, sounds and the like must be all the more innate if, 
on the occasion of certain corporeal motions, our mind is to be capable 
of representing them to itself, for there is no similarity between these 
ideas and the corporeal motions. Is it possible to imagine anything more 
absurd than that all the common notions within our mind arise from 
such motions and cannot exist without them? I would like our author to 
tell me what the corporeal motion is that is capable of forming some 
common notion to the effect that ‘things which are equal to a third thing 
are equal to each other’, or any other he cares to take. For all such 


1 Optics, pp. 153 and 167 above; cf. also Treatise on Man, pp. 1o1ff above. 


Comments on a Certain Broadsheet 305 


motions are particular, whereas the common notions are universal and 
bear no affinity with, or relation to, the motions. 

In article fourteen he goes on to assert that even the idea of God which 
is within us derives its being not from our faculty of thinking, in which 
the idea is innate, ‘but from divine revelation, or verbal instruction, or 
observation of things’. It is easier to recognize the error in this assertion if 
we consider that something can be said to derive its being from 
something else for two different reasons: either the other thing is its 
proximate and primary cause, without which it cannot exist, or it is a 
remote and merely accidental cause, which gives the primary cause 
occasion to produce its effect at one moment rather than another. Thus 
workers are the primary and proximate causes of their work, whereas 
those who give them orders to do the work, or promise to pay for it, are 
accidental and remote causes, for the workers might not do the work 
without instructions. There is, however, no doubt that verbal instruction 
or observation of things is often a remote cause which induces us to give 
some attention to the idea which we can have of God, and to bring it 
directly before our mind. But no one can say that this is the proximate 
and efficient cause of the idea, except someone who thinks that all we can 
ever understand about God is what he is called, namely ‘God’, or what 
corporeal form painters use to represent him. If the observation is visual, 
all it can, by its own unaided power, present to the mind are pictures, and 
indeed pictures which are composed of nothing more than a variety of 
corporeal motions, as the author himself tells us. If the observation is 
auditory, all it presents are words and utterances. If the observation is by 
means of the other senses, it cannot have any reference to God. It is surely 
obvious to everyone that, strictly speaking, sight in itself presents nothing 
but pictures, and hearing nothing but utterances and sounds. So every- 
thing over and above these utterances and pictures which we think of as 
being signified by them is represented to us by means of ideas which come 
to us from no other source than our own faculty of thinking. Conse- 
quently these ideas, along with that faculty, are innate in us, i.e. they 
always exist within us potentially, for to exist in some faculty is not to 
exist actually, but merely potentially, since the term ‘faculty’ denotes 
nothing but a potentiality. But no one can assert that we can know 
nothing of God other than his name or the corporeal image which artists 
give him, unless he is prepared openly to admit that he is an atheist and 
indeed totally lacking in intellect. 

In article fifteen, after giving us his opinion concerning God, our 
author controverts all the arguments which I used to demonstrate the 
existence of God. At this point we can only marvel at the impudence of 
the man, in his supposing that he can so easily and so briefly overturn all 


360 


361 


362 


363 


306 Comments on a Certain Broadsheet 


the arguments which I composed only after prolonged and careful 
meditation, and which I took an entire book to expound. But all the 
arguments which I adduced for this purpose reduce to two. The first is 
that, as I have shown,! we have a conception or idea of God which is such 
that if we attend to the idea closely and thoroughly examine the issue in 
the way I have explained, we shall recognize, simply from this scrutiny, 
that it is not possible that God does not exist, since existence is contained 
in the concept of God — and not just possible or contingent existence, as 
in the ideas of all other things, but absolutely necessary and actual 
existence. Besides I am not alone in regarding this argument as a certain 
and evident demonstration; many others do so as well, including those 
pre-eminently learned and intelligent men who have examined the argu- 
ment with care. Here is how the author of the broadsheet controverts my 
argument: ‘Our concept of God, or the idea of God which is present in 
our mind, does not in itself constitute a very strong argument for proving 
the existence of God, for it is not the case that everything of which we 
have an explicit conception exists.’ This statement shows that while he 
has read my writings, he has by no means been able, or willing, to 
understand them. For the force of my argument does not derive from the 
idea of God understood in a general sense, but from a particular 
characteristic of the idea, a characteristic which is most evident in our 
idea of God and which is not to be found in the concept of any other 
thing, namely the necessity of existence, which is required for the 
consummation of the perfections without which God cannot be under- 
stood. The second argument which I used to demonstrate the existence of 
God was based on the fact (which I clearly proved) that we would not 
have had the ability to understand all the perfections which we recognize 
in God, if it were not true that God exists and that we were created by 
him.? Our author thinks that he has thoroughly demolished this argu- 
ment with his assertion that ‘the idea we have of God no more transcends 
our characteristic powers of thinking than the concept of any other thing 
whatever’.’ If he means by this simply that the concept which we have of 
God without the aid of supernatural grace is no less natural than any of 
our concepts of other things, then his view agrees with mine; but on that 
basis he has no case against me. If, however, he thinks that in the concept 
of God no more objective perfections are implied than in all other 
concepts taken together, then he is clearly mistaken. It is just this 
superabundance of perfections, in which our concept of God surpasses 
all others, that I have used as the basis of my argument. 


1 See Med. v: vol. 11, pp. 45ff. 2 See Med. 11: vol. 0, pp. 28ff. 
3 Art. 18, p. 296 above. 


Comments on a Certain Broadsheet 307 


In the remaining six articles there is nothing worth commenting on 
except that when the author wishes to distinguish the properties of the 
soul, he speaks of them in a quite confused and inappropriate manner. I 
have stated that all these properties reduce to two principal ones, of 
which one is the perception of the intellect and the other the determina- 
tion of the will,! these our author calls ‘intellect’ and ‘volition’ 
respectively.2 He then goes on to divide what he calls ‘intellect’ into 
‘perception’ and ‘judgement’.’ But he differs from me on this point. For I 
saw that over and above perception, which is a prerequisite of judge- 
ment, we need affirmation and negation to determine the form of the 
judgement, and also that we are often free to withhold our assent, even if 
we perceive the matter in question. Hence I assigned the act of judging 
itself, which consists simply in assenting (i.e. in affirmation or denial) to 
the determination of the will rather than to the perception of the intellect. 
Later on, in enumerating the forms of perception, he lists only sense- 
perception, memory, and imagination.* We may gather from this that he 
does not admit any pure understanding, i.e. understanding which is not 
concerned with any corporeal images, and hence that his view is that we 
have no knowledge of God, or of the human mind, or of other 
incorporeal things. The only explanation for this that I can think of is 
that what thoughts he has on these matters are so confused that he is 
never aware of having a pure thought, a thought which is quite distinct 
from any corporeal image. 

At the end, he adds the following sentence taken from one of my 
writings: ‘No one acquires a great reputation for piety more easily than 
the superstitious or hypocritical person.’ What he means by this I cannot 
see, unless his reference to hypocrisy has to do with his frequently 
resorting to irony, though I hardly think that he can acquire a great 
reputation for piety that way. 

To sum up, I am forced to admit that I blush with shame to think that 
in the past I have praised this author as a man of the most penetrating 
intelligence, and have written somewhere or other that ‘I do not think he 
teaches any doctrines which I would be unwilling to acknowledge as my 
own.” But when I wrote that sentence, the only examples of his work 
that I had seen were ones in which he was faithfully copying me, with the 
exception of just one expression,° which had such unfortunate results for 


1 Cf. Principles, Part 1, art. 32, p. 204 above. 2 Art. 16, p. 296 above. 

3 Art. 17, ibid. 4 Art. 18, ibid. 

5 Cf. Letter to Voetius (published 1643) where Descartes says ‘Nevertheless I credit Regius 
with an exceedingly sharp and penetrating intellect, so that there is hardly anything in his 
writings which I would not be happy to acknowledge as my own’ (AT vilIB 163). 

6 Viz. the sentence, ‘Man is an entity only accidentally’. See Descartes’ letters to Regius of 
mid-December 1641 and January 1642 (AT 11 460 and 508). 


364 


365 


366 


308 Comments on a Certain Broadsheet 


him that I hoped he would make no further attempt of this sort. In other 
matters, I could see, he made a great show of embracing opinions which I 
considered to be absolutely true; so I put this down to his intelligence and 
insight. But now my wider experience compels me to think that it is not 
so much the love of truth which grips him as the love of novelty. He 
regards everything he has learnt from others as old-fashioned and 
obsolete, and nothing seems novel enough for him if he has not wrung it 
from his own brain. Yet so unfortunate are his own inventions that I have 
never noticed any word in his writings (save what he had copied from 
others) which in my view did not contain some error. I must therefore 
warn all those who are convinced that he is a champion of my opinions 
that there is not one of them of which he does not give a wrong and 
distorted account; and I have in mind here not just my views on 
metaphysics, on which he openly contradicts me, but also on physics, 
which he deals with somewhere in his writings. So I find this learned 
doctor’s treatment of my writings and his efforts at interpreting (or 
rather, falsifying) them much more annoying than the most bitter attacks 
which others have made upon them. 

Indeed I have never yet seen one of these harsh critics who did not 
foist upon me views which were utterly different from my own, and so 
preposterous and silly that I had no fear that any man of intelligence 
could be persuaded that they were mine. Thus as I write these words, I 
have just received two new pamphlets put together by an opponent of 
just this sort.’ In the first of these it is stated that there are ‘some 
innovators who deny that we can have any firm trust in the senses, and 
who contend that philosophers can deny that there is a God and doubt 
his existence, while at the same time they admit that actual conceptions 
of God, forms,” and ideas of him are naturally implanted in the human 
mind’. In the second pamphlet we are told that these innovators ‘have the 
audacity to proclaim that God should be called the efficient cause of 
himself not just in a negative sense but also in a positive sense’. In each of 
these pamphlets the sole concern is to pile up arguments to prove: first, 
that we have no actual knowledge of God in our mother’s womb, and 
hence that ‘no actual form or idea of God is innate in our mind’; second, 
that ‘we must not say that there is no God’ and that ‘those who do are 
atheists and should be punished by law’; and third, that God is not the 
‘efficient’ cause of himself. 

I might well suppose that all these assertions were not directed against 
me, for my name is not mentioned in these pamphlets, and not one of the 
views attacked strikes me as being anything but utterly absurd and false. 


1 Gemina Disputatio Metaphysica de Deo, Jacques de Rives (1647). 
2 Lat. species: see footnote 1, p. 154 above. 


Comments on a Certain Broadsheet 309 


Nevertheless, they are not unlike those views which have often been 
slanderously imputed to me in the past by men of that stamp; secondly, 
no one else is known to whom these views could be attributed; and lastly, 
many people are in no doubt that I am the object of attack in these 
pamphlets. For these reasons I shall take this opportunity to instruct their 
author on the following points. 

First,.by ‘innate ideas’ I have never meant anything other than what the 
author himself, on page six of the second pamphlet, explicitly asserts to 
be true, viz. that ‘there is present in us a natural power which enables us 
to know God’. But I have never written or even thought that such ideas 
are actual, or that they are some sort of ‘forms’ which are distinct from 
our faculty of thinking. Indeed, there is no one more opposed than I to 
the useless lumber of scholastic entities; so much so that I could hardly 
keep from laughing when I saw the enormous battalion of arguments 
which the gentleman had painstakingly mustered — quite without malice, 
no doubt — to prove that ‘babies have no actual conception of God while 
they are in their mother’s womb’ — as if he were thereby mounting a 
devastating assault upon me. 

Secondly, I have never even taught that ‘God is to be denied, or that he 
can deceive us, or that everything should be doubted, or that we should 
entirely withdraw our confidence in the senses, or that we should not 
distinguish between being asleep and being awake’, and other things of 
that sort — doctrines of which I am sometimes accused by ignorant 
detractors. I have explicitly disavowed all such views, and refuted them 
with very strong arguments — stronger, I venture to add, than any that 
anyone before me has employed in refuting them. In order to achieve an 
easier and more effective refutation of them, I proposed at the beginning 
of my Meditations to treat all such matters as doubtful. I was not the first 
to discover such doubts: the sceptics have long been harping on this 
theme. What could be more perverse than to ascribe to a writer views 
which he reports simply in order to refute? What could be more foolish 
than to pretend that during the interval in which such views are being 
stated, pending their refutation, they are the doctrines of the writer, and 
hence that someone who mentions the arguments of the atheists is 
temporarily an atheist? What more childish than to object that if he were 
to die before he discovered or wrote down his ‘hoped for refutation’ he 
would die an atheist, and that in the meantime he has been conveying a 
pernicious doctrine, and moreover that ‘evil should not be done for the 
sake of beneficial ends’, and so forth? Someone perhaps will say that I 
conveyed these false views, not as the opinions of others, but as my own. 
But so what? In the same book in which I related them I refuted all of 
them, and one could even see from the very title of the book that I was 


367 


368 


369 


310 Comments on a Certain Broadsheet 


utterly opposed to believing them, since it promises ‘demonstrations of 
the existence of God’. Is there anyone so dull as to imagine that the 
author of a book with such a title did not know, when writing the first 
pages, what he had undertaken to demonstrate in the rest of the book? I 
conveyed the objections as my own simply because the meditative style, 
which in my judgement was the most appropriate for expounding my 
arguments, demanded this approach. If this explanation does not satisfy 
our hostile critics, 1 should like to know what they would say about Holy 
Scripture (which should not be compared with the writings of mere men), 
when they see that there are some things in it which can be properly 
understood only if they are viewed as the utterances of impious people, 
or at any rate of people other than the Holy Ghost or the Prophets. For 
example, these sentences from Chapter 2 of Ecclesiastes: ‘There is 
nothing better for a man than that he should eat and drink, and that he 
should make his soul enjoy good in his labour. This also I saw, that it was 
from the hand of God. For who can eat or who else can hasten thereunto, 
more than I?’ And in the following chapter: ‘I said in mine heart 
concerning the estate of the sons of men, that God might manifest them, 
and that they might see that they themselves are beasts; for that which 
befalleth the sons of men befalleth beasts; even one thing befalleth them: 
as the one dieth, so dieth the other; yea, they have all one breath: so that 
a man hath no pre-eminence above a beast.’ Do they believe that the 
Holy Ghost here is instructing us that we should fill our bellies and 
wallow in pleasures, or that our souls are no more immortal than the 
souls of beasts? I do not think they are quite so mad as to believe that. So 
they ought not to slander me just because in my writings I have not 
availed myself of precautions which have never been observed by any 
other writer (nor, even, by the Holy Ghost). 

Thirdly and lastly, I must advise the author of these pamphlets that | 
have never written that God should be called ‘the efficient cause of 
himself not just in a negative sense but also in a positive sense’, as he is 
rash enough to allege on page eight of the second booklet. However 
carefully he sifts, scans and pores over my writings, he will not find in 
them anything like this — quite the reverse in fact.! Anyone who has read 
my writings, or has any knowledge of me, or at least does not think me 
utterly silly, knows that I am totally opposed to such extravagant views. 
Hence I can only wonder what these slanderers are aiming at. For if they 
want to convince people that I wrote things the very opposite of which 
are to be found in my writings, they should first have taken the 
precaution of suppressing all my publications, and should even have 


1 Cf. Fourth Replies: vol. 11, pp. 164ff. 


Comments on a Certain Broadsheet 311 


erased all recollection of them from the memory of those who have 
already read them. While these things remain undone, they are doing 
more harm to themselves than to me. It is a wonder also that they should 
so bitterly and zealously attack me, despite the fact that I have never 
provoked or harmed them (though no doubt if roused I could have hurt 
them), while they take no action against many others who devote entire 
books to the refutation of their doctrines, and ridicule them as hood- 
winked simpletons. But I do not want to add anything here which might 
make them give up their established practice of attacking me in their 
books, since I am very pleased to see that they think me so important. But 
in the meantime I pray that they recover their good sense. 


Written at Egmont, Holland, towards the end of December, 1647. 


Description of the Human Body 


Translator’s preface 


The extracts that follow, which are based on the text in Volume x1 of 
Adam and Tannery,! are from an unfinished treatise, La Description du 
corps humain, first published by Clerselier in 1664 with his edition of the 
Treatise on Man. (The alternative title ‘On the formation of the foetus’, 
which Clerselier placed at the head of each page, properly relates only to 
Part Four of the treatise.) The work dates from the winter of 1647/8, as 
we know from a letter to Princess Elizabeth of January 1648, where 
Descartes talks of working on a ‘description of the functions of the 
animal and of man’. Frans Burman, who interviewed Descartes in April 
1648, provides the following additional information: 


In the treatise on the animal which he [Descartes] worked on this winter he 
noticed the following: although his aim was merely to explain the functions of the 
animal, he saw that he could hardly do this without having to explain the 
formation of the animal right from the beginning. And this was something that he 
found to be derivable from his principles to the extent that he was able to give a 
reason for the existence of the eye, nose, brain and so on. He saw, moreover, that 
the nature of these things was so constituted in accordance with his principles 
that it could not be otherwise. But these were all matters which he did not wish to 
go into at such length, and so he gave up writing the treatise.” 


J.c. 


1 See General Introduction, p. x above. 
2 AT v 170. 


313 


AT XI 
223 


224 


225 


DESCRIPTION OF THE HUMAN BODY 
AND OF ALL ITS FUNCTIONS 
both those which do not in any way depend on the soul, and 
those which do, and including the chief cause of the 
formation of the parts of the body 


Part One 
PREFACE 


There is no more fruitful exercise than attempting to know ourselves. 
The benefits we may expect from such knowledge not only relate to 
ethics, as many would initially suppose, but also have a special import- 
ance for medicine. I believe that we would have been able to find many 
very reliable rules, both for curing illness and for preventing it, and even 
for slowing down the ageing process, if only we had spent enough effort 
on getting to know the nature of our body, instead of attributing to the 
soul functions which depend solely on the body and on the disposition of 
its organs. 

Since childhood, however, we have all found by experience that many 
bodily movements occur in obedience to the will, which is one of the 
faculties of the soul, and this has led us to believe that the soul is the 
principle responsible for all bodily movement. Our ignorance of anatomy 
and mechanics has also played a major role here. For in restricting our 
consideration to the outside of the human body, we have never imagined 
that it has within it enough organs or mechanisms to move of its own 
accord in all the different ways which we observe. Our error was 
reinforced by our belief that no movement occurs inside a corpse, though 
it possesses the same organs as a living body, and lacks only a soul. 

But when we try to get to know our nature more distinctly we can see 
that our soul, in so far as it is a substance which is distinct from the body, 
is known to us merely through the fact that it thinks, that is to say, under- 
stands, wills, imagines, remembers and has sensory perceptions; for 
all these functions are kinds of thought. The other functions which some 
people attribute to the soul, such as moving the heart and the arteries, 
digesting food in the stomach and so on, do not involve any thought, and 


314 


Description of the Human Body 315 


are simply bodily movements; further, it is more common for a body to 
be moved by another body than for it to be moved by a soul. Hence, we 
have less reason to attribute such functions to the soul than to the body. 

We can also observe that when some part of our body is harmed, for 
example when a nerve is irritated, the result is that the part in question 
ceases to obey our will as it normally does, and sometimes is subject to 
convulsive movements despite our wishes. This shows that the soul 
cannot produce any movement in the body without the appropriate 
disposition of the bodily organs which are required for making the 
movement. On the contrary, when all the bodily organs are appropriately 
disposed for some movement, the body has no need of the soul in order 
to produce that movement; and, as a result, all the movements which 
we in no way experience as depending on our thought must be attributed 
not to the soul, but simply to the disposition of the organs. Even the 
movements which we call ‘voluntary’ occur principally as a result of this 
disposition of the organs, since, although it is the soul that determines the 
movements, they cannot be produced without the requisite disposition of 
the organs, no matter how much we may will this to happen. 

Furthermore, although all these movements cease in a corpse, once the 
soul has quit the body, we must not infer that it is the soul which 
produces them; the only inference we may make is that it is one and the 
same cause which both makes the body unfitted to produce these 
movements and makes the soul leave the body. 

It is true that we may find it hard to believe that the mere disposition of 
the bodily organs is sufficient to produce in us all the movements which 
are in no way determined by our thought. So I will now try to prove the 
point, and to give such a full account of the entire bodily machine that we 
will have no more reason to think that it is our soul which produces in it 
the movements which we know by experience are not controlled by our 
will than we have reason to think that there is a soul in a clock which 
makes it tell the time. 

Everyone already has some knowledge of the different parts of the 
human body. That is to say, we all know that it is composed of a very 
large number of bones, muscles, nerves, veins and arteries, together with 
a heart, a brain, a liver, lungs and a stomach. Indeed, we have all at some 
time or other seen various animals cut open, and been able to look at the 
shape and arrangement of their insides, which very much resemble our 
own. This is all the anatomy that the reader will need to have studied in 
order to understand this book; for I will take care to explain any further 
details that need to be known as and when I have occasion to speak of 
them. 

First of all, I want the reader to have a general notion of the entire 


226 


227 


(239) 


(241) 


316 Description of the Human Body 


machine which it is my task to describe. So I will say here that the heat in 
the heart is like the great spring or principle responsible for all the move- 
ments occurring in the machine. The veins are pipes which conduct the 
blood from all the parts of the body towards the heart, where it serves to 
fuel the heat there. The stomach and the intestines are another much larger 
pipe perforated with many little holes through which the juices from the 
food ingested run into the veins; these then carry the juices straight to the 
heart. The arteries are yet another set of pipes through which the blood, 
which is heated and rarefied in the heart, passes from there into all the 
other parts of the body, bringing them heat and material to nourish them. 
Finally, the parts of the blood that are most agitated and lively are carried 
to the brain by the arteries coming directly from the heart in the 
straightest line of all; these parts of the blood make up a kind of air or 
very fine! wind which is called the ‘animal spirits’. These dilate the 
brain and make it ready to receive impressions both from external objects 
and from the soul; and in receiving these impressions the brain acts as the 
organ or seat of the ‘common’ sense,” the imagination and the memory. 
Next, this same air or these same spirits flow from the brain through the 
nerves into all the muscles, thus making the nerves ready to function as 
organs for the external senses; they also inflate the muscles in various 
ways and thus impart movement to all the parts of the body. 

These, in brief, are all the things which it is my task to describe in this 
book. The purpose is to enable us to know distinctly what there is in each 
of our actions which depends only on the body, and what there is which 
depends on the soul. This will enable us to make better use both of body 
and of soul and to cure or prevent the maladies of both. 


Part Two 
THE MOVEMENT OF THE HEART AND THE BLOOD? 


... This circular movement of the blood was first noticed by an English 
physician called Harvey, who deserves the highest possible praise for 
making such a valuable discovery ... 

But Harvey was not so successful, in my view, on the question of the 
heart’s movement. He imagined, against the general opinion of medical 


1 Fr. subtil, by which Descartes means ‘composed of very small, fast-moving particles’. 

2 See footnote 1, above p. 41. 

3 The first part of this section closely follows the exposition given in the Treatise on Man 
and the Discourse, Part 5 (pp. 100ff, and 134-7 above). For Harvey, see footnote p. 136 
above. 


Description of the Human Body 317 


men, and against the ordinary evidence of what we see, that when the 
heart lengthens, its cavities increase in size, and that when it shortens, 
they become narrower. I claim, instead, to demonstrate that they become 
even larger when the heart shortens. 

The reasons which led Harvey to his view are the following. He 
observed that the heart becomes harder when it shortens; and that in the 
case of frogs and other animals which have little blood, it becomes 
whiter, or less red, when it lengthens; and finally, that if we make an 
incision down to the cavities, blood flows out through the incision at the 
moment when the heart shortens, but not when it lengthens. He believed 
that it was perfectly sound to infer from this that when the heart becomes 
hard it is contracting; he further inferred that the heart’s becoming less 
red in certain animals is evidence that the blood is leaving it; and finally 
he thought that since blood is observed to come out via the incision, this 
obliges us to believe that the cause is a narrowing of the space containing 
the blood. 

He could have supported this last point by a very striking experiment. 
If you slice off the pointed end of the heart in a live dog, and insert a 
finger into one of the cavities, you will feel unmistakably that every time 
the heart gets shorter it presses the finger, and every time it gets longer it 
stops pressing it. This seems to make it quite certain that the cavities are 
narrower when there is more pressure on the finger than when there is 
less. Nevertheless, all that this proves is that observations may often lead 
us astray when we do not examine their possible causes with sufficient 
care. Admittedly, if the interior of the heart contracted, as Harvey 
imagines, this could cause it to become harder and less red in animals 
which have little blood; it could also cause the blood in the cavities to 
come out via the incision we have made; and finally, it could cause 
pressure on a finger inserted through the incision. But all this does not 
alter the fact that the same effects could also proceed from a different 
cause, namely the expansion of the blood which I have described. 

In order to be in a position to tell which of these two causes is the true 
one, we will have to consider other observations which are not compati- 
ble with both explanations. The first such observation I can provide is 
this. If the heart becomes hard because of the contraction of the fibres 
inside it, this must reduce its size; if, instead, the cause of the hardening is 
the expansion of the blood within the heart, this must increase its size. 
Now we see when we make our observations that the heart does not 
diminish in size, but on the contrary, grows larger — which has led other 
medical men to conclude that it swells up during this phase. It is true, 
however, that the increase in size is not great; but the reason for this is 


242 


2.43 


244 


318 Description of the Human Body 


evident: the heart has several fibres stretched like cords from one side of 
its cavities to the other, and these stop them opening a great deal. 

There is another observation which shows that when the heart 
shortens and gets hard its cavities do not thereby become narrower, but 
on the contrary become wider. If you cut off the pointed end of the heart 
in a young rabbit which is still alive, you will be able to see by inspection 
that the cavities become slightly wider, and emit blood, when the heart 
hardens; and even when they emit only very small drops of blood, 
because very little blood remains in the animal’s body, they still continue 
to retain the same width. What stops them opening even wider are the 
tiny fibres stretched from one side to the other, which hold them back. 
What makes this less obviously apparent in the heart of a dog, or other 
more vigorous animal, than it is in that of a young rabbit, is that the 
fibres occupy a greater part of the cavities; they stiffen when the heart 
becomes hard and can exert pressure on a finger placed in the cavities. 
But for all that, the cavities do not become narrower; on the contrary, 
they become wider. 

I will add a third observation, which is as follows. When the blood 
leaves the heart, it does not have the same qualities which it had when 
entering: it is much hotter, more rarefied and more agitated. Now if we 
suppose that the heart moves in the way Harvey describes, we must 
imagine some faculty which causes this movement; yet the nature of this 
faculty is much harder to conceive of than whatever Harvey purports to 
explain by invoking it. What is more, we shall also have to suppose that 
there are additional faculties which change the qualities of the blood 
while it is in the heart. If, instead, we restrict our consideration to the ex- 
pansion of the blood which must follow necessarily from the heat (which, 
as everyone recognizes, is greater in the heart than in all the other parts of 
the body), it will be plain to see that this expansion alone is sufficient to 
move the heart in the way I have described, and also to change the nature 
of the blood in the way which observation shows to be the case. Indeed, it 
is sufficient to produce all the changes which one can imagine must be 
required in order to prepare the blood, and make it more suited for 
nourishing all the limbs and for employment in all the functions which it 
facilitates in the body. Thus we do not have to suppose, in order to 
explain all this, any unknown or strange faculties. 

For surely the best and swiftest way of preparing the blood that we can 
possibly imagine is that which is effected through fire or heat — the 
strongest agent that we know of in nature. The heat rarefies the blood in 
the heart, separates the tiny parts of the blood one from the other, and 
divides them up and changes their shapes in all the ways we can imagine. 

So I am very surprised that although it has always been known that 


Description of the Human Body 319 


there is more heat in the blood than in the whole of the rest of the body, 
and that blood can be rarefied by heat, no one has so far noticed that it is 
the rarefaction of the blood, and this alone, that is the cause of the heart’s 
movement. It may seem that Aristotle thought of this when he remarked, 
in Chapter Twenty of his book On Respiration, ‘this movement is similar 
to the action of a liquid boiled by heat’. He also said that the pulse is 
caused by the ‘juices from ingested food continually entering the heart 
and raising its inmost skin’.! But since he makes no mention in this 
passage either of the blood or of the way in which the heart is made, it is 
clearly only by chance that he happened to say something approaching 
the truth; he possessed no certain knowledge on the matter. What is 
more, Aristotle’s view on this question was not adopted by anyone, even 
though on many other questions where his views are much less plausible 
he had the good fortune to gain a large number of followers. 

Nevertheless, it is so important to know the true cause of the heart’s 
movement that without such knowledge it is impossible to know 
anything which relates to the theory of medicine. For all the other 
functions of the animal are dependent on this, as will be clearly seen in 
what follows. 


Part Three 


NUTRITION? 


... But in order to achieve a distinct understanding of this point, we 
should bear in mind that the parts of all living bodies which require 
Nutrition to sustain them (i.e. animals and plants) are continually 
undergoing change. So there is no difference between those parts we call 
fluid, such as the blood, the humours and the spirits, and those we call 
solid, such as bones, flesh, nerves and skin, beyond the fact that each 
particle of these latter parts moves much more slowly than the particles 
of the former. 

To conceive how these particles move we must suppose that all the 
solid parts are composed simply of small fibres stretching out and folding 
back and sometimes intertwining in various ways. Each fibre emerges 
from a place on one of the branches of an artery; and the fluid parts, i.e. 
the humours and the spirits, flow alongside these little fibres, through the 


1 Aristotle, Parva Naturalia 480a4. 

2 Descartes begins this section of the work by arguing that it is the arterial blood (rather 
than that returning to the heart through the veins) which serves to nourish all the regions 
of the body; its particles, being small and fast-moving, can easily enter among the strands 
composing the various solid parts of the body. 


245 


(247) 


248 


249 


320 Description of the Human Body 


spaces around them, thus making up an infinite number of small 
channels, all originating in the arteries and normally emerging from 
the pores of the arteries which are nearest to the roots of the fibres 
alongside which they run. After following the fibres through various twists 
and turns in the body they finally come to the surface of the skin; and the 
humours and spirits then evaporate into the outer air through its pores. 

In addition to these pores through which the humours and spirits 
run, there are many other much narrower pores through which there 
continually passes material of the first two elements which I described in 
my Principles.' The agitated material of the first two elements encounters 
the agitated material of the humours and the spirits; they in turn, as they 
run alongside the little fibres making up the solid parts of the body, 
continually make the fibres move forward slightly, albeit very slowly. 
Thus each part of every fibre travels from the place where the fibre has its 
roots to the surface of the limb where it terminates; and on arrival it 
encounters the air, or the other bodies touching the surface of the skin, 
which makes it separate from the rest of the fibre. Thus some part is 
always being detached from the end of each fibre, and at the same time 
another part is being attached to the root, in the way I have already 
described. If the detached part emerges at the skin, it evaporates in the 
air; but if it emerges at the surface of some muscle or some other interior 
part, it mixes with the fluid parts and flows with them to wherever they 
are going, i.e. sometimes outside the body and sometimes through the 
veins towards the heart, where the fluid parts often return. 

Thus we may see that all the parts of the little fibres which make up the 
solid parts of the body have a movement which is no different from that 
of the humours and the spirits, except that it is much slower; similarly, 
the movement of the humours and the spirits is slower than that of the 
more subtle material.’ 

These different speeds are the cause of the various solid or fluid parts 
becoming larger or smaller as they rub against one another; they behave 
in different ways depending on the different constitution of each body. 
When one is young, for example, the little fibres which make up the solid 
parts are not yet very tightly joined together, and the channels along 
which the fluid parts flow are fairly large; hence the movement of the 
fibres is slower than when one is old. Also, more matter is being attached 
to their roots than is being detached from their extremities, which causes 
them to grow longer and get stronger; their increase in size is the means 
whereby the body grows. 


1 See Part 111, art. 52, above p. 258. 
2 See footnote 1, above p. 316. 


Description of the Human Body 321 


When the humours which flow between the little fibres are not 
copious, they all pass fairly rapidly along the channels containing them, 
causing the body to grow taller and the solid parts to grow without 
getting any thicker. But when the humours are very copious, they cannot 
flow so easily between the little fibres of the solid particles; and in the 
case of those parts which have very irregular branch-like shapes and thus 
have the hardest passage of all between the fibres, the result is that little 
by little they become lodged there and form fat. Fat does not grow in the 
body by means of nourishment in the strict sense, as flesh does; it 
accumulates simply because many of its parts join together and stick one 
to the other, as do the parts of dead things. 

When the humours become less copious they flow more easily and 
more quickly, because the subtle matter and the accompanying spirits 
have more force to agitate them. This causes them gradually to pick up 
the particles of fat and carry them off, which is how people become thin. 

As we get older, the little fibres which make up the solid parts of the 
body contract and stick together more and more, and in the end they 
attain such a degree of hardness that the body stops growing entirely, and 
even loses the ability to be nourished. This leads to such a disproportion 
between the solid parts and the fluid parts that life is extinguished by old 
age alone .. .! 


Part Four 


THE PARTS OF THE BODY WHICH ARE FORMED IN THE 
SEMINAL MATERIAL 


We may acquire an even more perfect knowledge of the way in which all 
the parts of the body are nourished if we consider how they were 
originally formed from the seminal material. Hitherto I have been 
unwilling to put my views on this topic in writing because I have not yet 
been able to make enough observations? to verify all the ideas I have had 
on the subject. Nevertheless, I cannot forbear, in passing, to give some 
indication of the most general points; I hope I shall run the least risk 
of having to retract these later, in the light of fresh observations. 

I leave the shape and arrangement of the particles of the seminal 
material quite unspecified; it is enough for me to state that the seed of 
plants, being hard and solid, may have its parts arranged and situated in 
a precise way that cannot be altered without destroying their efficacy. But 


1 There follow further details of the role of the blood in nutrition. 
2 Fr. expériences; see footnote, p. 143 above. 


250 


(252) 


253 


254 


255 


322 Description of the Human Body 


it is quite different in the case of the seminal material of animals, which is 
very fluid and is ordinarily produced by the copulation of the two sexes. 
This material is apparently just a disorganized mixture of two fluids 
which act on each other as a kind of yeast, generating mutual heat. Some 
of the particles thus acquire as much agitation as fire has, and expand 
and press on other particles, thereby putting them little by little into the 
state required for the formation of the parts of the body. 

To achieve this result the two fluids in question do not need to be very 
different. We may observe how old dough makes new dough swell, or 
how the scum formed on beer is able to serve as yeast for another brew; 
and in the’same way it is easy enough to accept that the seminal material 
of each sex functions as a yeast to that of the other, when the two fluids 
are mixed together. 

Now I think that the first thing to happen in this mixture of seminal 
material is that heat is generated; and this bring it about that all the drops 
of the fluid no longer resemble each other. The heat acts in the same way 
as it does in new wine when it ferments, or in hay which is stored before 
it is dry: it causes a number of particles to gather together in some part of 
the space containing them, and then makes them expand and press upon 
other surrounding particles. This is how the heart begins to form. 

Next, since the small parts which are expanded in this way tend to 
continue their movement in a straight line, and the heart which has begun 
to form resists them, they slowly move away and make their way to the 
area where the brain-stem forms later on; in so doing they displace other 
particles which move round in a circle so as to occupy their original place 
in the heart. These latter particles, after the short time needed for them to 
assemble in the heart, in turn expand and move away, following the same 
path as the earlier group. The result is that some particles from the earlier 
group which are still in position, together with others which have moved 
in from elsewhere to take the place of those which have meanwhile left, 
now move into the heart; here they expand and move away once more. 
This expansion, which occurs in various repeated phases in this way, is 
what the beating of the heart, or the pulse, consists in. 

Concerning the material which passes into the heart, it should be noted 
that the violent agitation of the heat which makes it expand not only 
causes some of the particles to move away and become separated, but 
also causes others to gather; these press and bump against one another 
and divide into many extremely small strands which stay so close to one 
another that only the very subtle matter (which I called the ‘first element’ 
in my Principles!) can occupy the spaces left around them. The particles 


1 See Principles, Part 111, art. 52, p. 258 above. 


Description of the Human Body 323 


which join together in this way as they move out of the heart never leave 
the route by which they can go back into it — unlike the many other 
particles which penetrate the mass of seminal material more easily on 
every side; this material is the source from which new particles continue 
to move towards the heart, until it is all used up. 

As a result of this, those who know the explanation of the nature of 
light which I gave both in my Optics and my Principles, and the 
explanation of the nature of colours which I gave in my Meteorology,' will 
easily be able to understand why the blood of all animals is red. For, as I 
explained in the works just cited, what makes us see light is simply the 
pressure of the material of the second element. The material, as I said, is 
composed of many small balls which are in mutual contact; and we have 
sensory awareness of two kinds of motion which these balls have. One is 
the motion by which they approach our eyes in a straight line, which 
gives us the sensation of light; and the other is the motion whereby they 
turn about their own centres as they approach us. If the speed at which 
they turn is much smaller than that of their rectilinear motion, the body 
from which they come appears blue to us; while if the turning speed is 
much greater than that of their rectilinear motion, the body appears red 
to us. But the only type of body which could possibly make their turning 
motion faster is one whose tiny parts have such slender strands, and ones 
which are so close together (as I have shown those of the blood to be), 
that the only material revolving round them is that of the first element. 
The little balls of the second element encounter this material of the first 
element on the surface of the blood; this material of the first element then 
passes with a continuous, very rapid, oblique motion from one gap 
between the balls to another, thus moving in an opposite direction to the 
balls, so that they are forced by it to turn about their centres. Indeed, 
their speed of rotation is perforce more rapid than any other cause could 
produce, since the first element surpasses all other bodies in speed. 

It is for virtually the same reason that iron appears red when it is hot or 
that coals appear red when they are burning: at such times their pores are 
filled only with material of the first element. But since these pores are not 
so constricted as those of blood, and the first element is present in large 
enough quantities to produce light, the shade of red is different from that 
of blood. 

As soon as the heart begins to form in this way, the rarefied blood 
leaving it makes its way in a straight line in the direction of least 
resistance, viz. towards the region of the body where the brain forms 


2.56 


later on; and the path taken by the blood begins to form the upper part of 257 


1 Optics, pp. 152ff above; Principles, Part 3, art. 55-64; Meteorology, Disc. 8. 


324 Description of the Human Body 


the great artery. Now, because of the resistance produced by the parts of 
seminal material which it encounters, the blood does not travel very far 
in a straight line without being pushed back towards the heart along the 
same path by which it came. But it cannot return down this path, because 
the way is blocked by the new blood which the heart is producing. This 
causes it to be deflected a little on its downward path, towards the side 
opposite to that from which new material is entering the heart. This is the 
side where we shall afterwards find the spine. The blood makes its way by 
this route towards the area where the genital organs will be formed, and 
that path which it takes on its descent is the lower part of the great 
artery. But because the parts of the seminal material also exert pressure 
from this side, they resist the movement of the blood; furthermore, the 
heart continually sends new blood towards the top and the bottom of this 
artery. So the blood is forced to make its way in a circular direction back 
towards the heart via the side farthest from the spine, where the chest is 
formed later on. The route which the blood takes in its return towards 
the heart is what we afterwards call the vena cava.! 


1 There follow details of the further development of the heart and of the formation of the 
lungs and brain. Part 5 deals principally with the formation of the veins and arteries. 


The Passions of the Soul 


Translator’s preface 


Descartes’ last philosophical work was written in French, printed in 
Holland, and published in Amsterdam and Paris in 1649 under the title 
Les Passions de l’Ame.' The book’s publication in Paris seems to have 
been arranged by a ‘friend’ whose anonymous letters, with Descartes’ 
replies, forms its preface. 

Descartes composed the work largely at the urging of Princess 
Elizabeth of Bohemia (1618-80), and its origin can be traced in their 
correspondence. Elizabeth first mentions the passions when, wondering 
how the soul can be governed by the body given that they have nothing in 
common, she asks Descartes to explain ‘the manner of [the soul’s] actions 
and passions in the body’ (20 June 1643). Descartes’ reply — that the 
body causes the soul to have feelings and passions, and the soul causes 
the body to move, through an inexplicable ‘union’ between the soul and 
body — did not satisfy the princess. Nor was she satisfied when Descartes 
sought to answer her question with vague moralizing and practical 
advice for the control of the passions. Eventually she insisted that he give 
‘a definition of the passions, in order to make them well known’ (13 
September 1645). Descartes obliged by producing a little ‘treatise on the 
passions’ which he gave to Elizabeth in 1646. In the following year he 
entered into correspondence with Queen Christina of Sweden (1626-89), 
to whom he also sent a copy of the ‘little treatise’, which reportedly she 
read while hunting. This treatise, possibly a draft of the first two parts of 
the published work, seems also to have been seen by Clerselier, to whom 
Descartes says, in a letter of 23 April 1649, that he has been ‘indolent in 
revising it and in adding the things you thought lacking, which will 
increase its length by a third’. 

Invited to Sweden by Queen Christina, Descartes arrived in Stockholm 
in October 1649, a month before publication of The Passions of the Soul. 
Suffering from the rigours of the Swedish winter and the tedium of his 
courtly duties (which included giving lessons to the Queen at five o’clock 
in the morning), he contracted pneumonia and died in Stockholm on 11 
February 1650. 

R.S. 


1 The translation below follows the text in volume x1 of Adam and Tannery; see General 
Introduction, p. x above. 


325 


AT XI 
323 


Prefatory letters 


[The preface comprises a ‘Notice from a friend of the author’, two letters 
from the friend to Descartes, and Descartes’ replies to these letters. The 
identity of the friend is unknown: several suggestions have been made 
(e.g. Clerselier, Picot, and Descartes himself), but none has been conclu- 
sively established. In the ‘Notice’ the friend asserts that Descartes sent 
him the work and gave him permission to add a preface and get it 
published, and that he proposes to make the preface consist simply of 
his correspondence with Descartes since this contains ‘many points of 
which I believe the public would wish to be informed’. In his first letter, 
dated Paris, 6 November 1648, the friend complains about Descartes’ 
failure to show him the treatise on the passions when they met in Paris 
the previous summer. Reproaching Descartes for the ‘negligence and 
other faults’ which keep him from pursuing his scientific research as 
actively as he ought, the friend threatens to publish the letter, so as to 
shame Descartes into greater activity and encourage public support for 
his research. Here is Descartes’ reply.] 


Sir, 

Among the insults and reproaches which I find in the long letter you have 
taken the trouble to write me, I observe many things to my advantage — 
so many, indeed, that if you had this letter published, as you said you 
would, I fear it might be imagined that we were more closely associated 
than in fact we are, and that I had asked you to include things in the 
letter which decency forbade me to utter in public myself. That is why | 
shall not pause here to reply point by point. I shall merely give you two 
reasons which, I think, should prevent you from publishing this letter. 
First, I do not believe you can possibly achieve the aim which I assume 
you had in writing it. Second, my attitude is not at all what you imagine it 
to be. It is not indignation or disgust which prevents me from wishing to 
do everything in my power to serve the public. For I consider myself 
indebted to it for the favourable reception which many people have given 
to the works I have already published. I have not previously shown you 
my writings on the passions simply because I did not wish to be obliged 


326 


Prefatory letters 327 


to show it to certain other persons who would not have made good use of 
it. In fact I had composed it only to be read by a princess whose mental 
powers are so extraordinary that she can easily understand matters 
which seem very difficult to our learned doctors. So the only points I 
explained at length in it are those I thought to be novel. Lest you should 
doubt what I say, I promise to revise this work on the passions and add 
whatever I think necessary in order to make it more intelligible; then I 
shall send it to you, and you may do with it whatever you please. For I 
am, etc. 

Egmont, 4 December 1648. 


[In the second letter, dated 23 July 1649, the friend complains that he 
has not yet received the treatise, and says that he is beginning to think 
that Descartes promised to send it only to prevent publication of his 
previous letter. Here is Descartes’ reply.] 


Sir, 
You are determined to think that I have used an artifice in order to 
prevent you from publishing the long letter which you wrote to me last 
year. I am quite innocent of this artifice; nor did I have any need to use it. 
For apart from the fact that I do not believe your letter could produce the 
effect you claim, I am not so lazy that my desire to gain self-instruction 
and to write something useful for other men could be overpowered by 
fear of the work to which I would be committed if I received from the 
public the means of putting many observations! to the test. I cannot make 
excuses so easily for the negligence for which you blame me. For I confess 
that I have spent more time in revising the little treatise I am sending you 
than I had previously spent in composing it. And yet I have added only a 
few things to it, and I have changed nothing in the style, whose simplicity 
and brevity will reveal that my intention was to explain the passions only 
as a natural philosopher, and not as a rhetorician or even as a moral 
philosopher. Thus, I foresee that this treatise will fare less well than my 
other writings. Though more people may perhaps be drawn by its title to 
read it, yet only those who take the trouble to study it with care can 
possibly be satisfied with it. Such as it is, then, I put it into your hands, 
etc. 

Egmont, 14 August 1649. 


1 Fr. expériences; see footnote, p. 143 above. 


324 


(325) 


326 


327 


328 


PART ONE 


The Passions in General 


and incidentally the whole nature of man 


1. What is a passion with regard to one subject is always an action in 
some other regard 

The defects of the sciences we have from the ancients are nowhere more 
apparent than in their writings on the passions. This topic, about which 
knowledge has always been keenly sought, does not seem to be one of the 
more difficult to investigate since everyone feels passions in himself and 
so has no need to look elsewhere for observations to establish their 
nature. And yet the teachings of the ancients about the passions are so 
meagre and for the most part so implausible that I cannot hope to 
approach the truth except by departing from the paths they have 
followed. That is why I shall be obliged to write just as if I were 
considering a topic that no one had dealt with before me. In the first 
place, I note that whatever takes place or occurs is generally called by 
philosophers a ‘passion’ with regard to the subject to which it happens 
and an ‘action’ with regard to that which makes it happen. Thus, 
although an agent and patient are often quite different, an action and 
passion must always be a single thing which has these two names on 
account of the two different subjects to which it may be related. 


2. To understand the passions of the soul we must distinguish its 
functions from those of the body 

Next I note that we are not aware of any subject which acts more directly 
upon our soul than the body to which it is joined. Consequently we 
should recognize that what is a passion in the soul is usually an action in 
the body. Hence there is no better way of coming to know about our 
passions than by examining the difference between the soul and the body, 
in order to learn to which of the two we should attribute each of the 
functions present in us. 


328 


Part One 329 


3. The rule we must follow in order to do this 

We shall not find this very difficult if we bear in mind that anything we 
experience as being in us, and which we see can also exist in wholly 
inanimate bodies, must be attributed only to our body. On the other 
hand, anything in us which we cannot conceive in any way as capable of 
belonging to a body must be attributed to our soul. 


4. The heat and the movement of the limbs proceed from the body, and 
thoughts from the soul 

Thus, because we have no conception of the body as thinking in any way 
at all, we have reason to believe that every kind of thought present in us 
belongs to the soul. And since we do not doubt that there are inanimate 
bodies which can move in as many different ways as our bodies, if not 
more, and which have as much heat or more (as experience shows in the 
case of a flame, which has in itself much more heat and movement than 
any of our limbs), we must believe that all the heat and all the movements 
present in us, in so far as they do not depend on thought, belong solely to 
the body. 


5. It is an error to believe that the soul gives movement and heat to the 
body 

In this way we shall avoid a very serious error which many have fallen 
into, and which I regard as the primary cause of our failure up to now to 
give a satisfactory explanation of the passions and of everything else 
belonging to the soul. The error consists in supposing that since dead 
bodies are devoid of heat and movement, it is the absence of the soul 
which causes this cessation of movement and heat. Thus it has been 
believed, without justification, that ou. natural heat and all the move- 
ments of our bodies depend on the soul; whereas we ought to hold, ‘on 
the contrary, that the soul takes its leave when we die only because this 
heat ceases and the organs which bring about bodily movement decay. 


6. The difference between a living body and a dead body 

So as to avoid this error, let us note that death never occurs through 
the absence of the soul, but only because one of the principal parts of 
the body decays. And let us recognize that the difference between the 
body of a living man and that of a dead man is just like the difference 
between, on the one hand, a watch or other automaton (that is, a 
self-moving machine) when it is wound up and contains in itself the 
corporeal principle of the movements for which it is designed, together 
with everything else required for its operation; and, on the other hand, the 


329 


330 


331 


332 


330 The Passions of the Soul 


same watch or machine when it is broken and the principle of its 
movement ceases to be active. 


7. A brief account of the parts of the body and of some of their 
functions 

To make this more intelligible I shall explain in a few words the way in 
which the mechanism of our body is composed. Everyone knows that 
within us there is a heart, brain, stomach, muscles, nerves, arteries, veins, 
and similar things. We know too that the food we eat goes down to the 
stomach and bowels, and that its juice then flows into the liver and all the 
veins, where it mixes with the blood they contain, thus increasing its 
quantity. Those who have heard anything at all about medicine know in 
addition how the heart is constructed and how the blood in the veins can 
flow easily from the vena cava into its right-hand side, pass from there 
into the lungs through the vessel called the arterial vein, then return from 
the lungs into the left-hand side of the heart through the vessel called the 
venous artery, and finally pass from there into the great artery, whose 
branches spread through the whole body. Likewise all those not com- 
pletely blinded by the authority of the ancients, and willing to open their 
eyes to examine the opinion of Harvey regarding the circulation of the 
blood, do not doubt that the veins and arteries of the body are like 
streams through which the blood flows constantly and with great 
rapidity. It makes its way from the right-hand cavity of the heart through 
the arterial vein, whose branches are spread throughout the lungs and 
connected with those of the venous artery; and via this artery it passes 
from the lungs into the left-hand side of the heart. From there it goes into 
the great artery, whose branches are spread through the rest of the body 
and connected with the branches of the vena cava, which carries the same 
blood once again into the right-hand cavity of the heart. These two 
cavities are thus like sluices through which all the blood passes upon each 
complete circuit it makes through the body. It is known, moreover, that 
every movement of the limbs depends on the muscles, which are opposed 
to each other in such a way that when one of them becomes shorter it 
draws towards itself the part of the body to which it is attached, which 
simultaneously causes the muscle opposed to it to lengthen. Then, if the 
latter happens to shorten at some other time, it makes the former 
lengthen again, and draws towards itself the part to which they are 
attached. Finally, it is known that all these movements of the muscles, 
and likewise all sensations, depend on the nerves, which are like little 
threads or tubes coming from the brain and containing, like the brain 
itself, a certain very fine! air or wind which is called the ‘animal spirits’. 


1 Fr. subtil; see note 1, p. 316 above. 


Part One 331 


8. The principle underlying all these functions 

But it is not commonly known how these animal spirits and nerves help to 
produce movements and sensations, or what corporeal principle makes 
them act. That is why, although I have already touched upon this 
question in other writings, I intend to speak briefly about it here.'! While 
we are alive there is a continual heat in our hearts, which is a kind of fire 
that the blood of the veins maintains there. This fire is the corporeal 
principle underlying all the movements of our limbs. 


9. How the movement of the heart takes place 

Its first effect is that it makes the blood which fills the cavities of the 
heart expand. This causes the blood, now needing to occupy a larger 
space, to rush from the right-hand cavity into the arterial vein and from 
the left-hand cavity into the great artery. Then, when this expansion 
ceases, fresh blood immediately enters the right-hand cavity of the heart 
from the vena cava, and the left-hand cavity from the venous artery. For 
there are tiny membranes at the entrances to these four vessels which are 
so arranged that the blood can enter the heart only through the latter two 
and leave it only through the former two. When the new blood has 
entered the heart it is immediately rarefied in the same way as before. 
This and this alone is what the pulse or beating of the heart and arteries 
consists in, and it explains why the beating is repeated each time new 
blood enters the heart. It is also the sole cause of the movement of the 
blood, making it flow constantly and very rapidly in all the arteries and 
veins, so that it carries the heat it acquires in the heart to all the other 
parts of the body, and provides them with nourishment. 


10. How the animal spirits are produced in the brain 

What is, however, more worthy of consideration here is that all the most 
lively and finest parts of the blood, which have been rarefied by the 
heat in the heart, constantly enter the cavities of the brain in large 
numbers. What makes them go there rather than elsewhere is that all the 
blood leaving the heart through the great artery follows a direct route 
towards this place, and since not all this blood can enter there because 
the passages are too narrow, only the most active and finest parts pass 
into it while the rest spread out into the other regions of the body. Now 
these very fine parts of the blood make up the animal spirits. For them to 
do this the only change they need to undergo in the brain is to be 
separated from the other less fine parts of the blood. For what I am 
calling ‘spirits’ here are merely bodies: they have no property other than 


1 See Discourse, part 5, pp. 135—9 above. 


333 


334 


335 


336 


337 


332 The Passions of the Soul 


that of being extremely small bodies which move very quickly, like the 
jets of flame that come from a torch. They never stop in any place, and as 
some of them enter the brain’s cavities, others leave it through the pores 
in its substance. These pores conduct them into the nerves, and then to 
the muscles. In this way the animal spirits move the body in all the 
various ways it can be moved. 


11. How the movements of the muscles take place 

For, as already mentioned, the sole cause of all the movements of the 
limbs is the shortening of certain muscles and the lengthening of the 
opposed muscles. What causes one muscle to become shorter rather than 
its opposite is simply that fractionally more spirits from the brain come 
to it than to the other. Not that the spirits which come directly from the 
brain are sufficient by themselves to move the muscles; but they cause the 
other spirits already in the two muscles to leave one of them very 
suddenly and pass into the other. In this way the one they leave becomes 
longer and more relaxed, and the one they enter, being suddenly swollen 
by them, becomes shorter and pulls the limb to which it is attached. This 
is easy to understand, provided one knows that very few animal spirits 
come continually from the brain to each muscle, and that any muscle 
always contains a quantity of its own spirits. These move very quickly, 
sometimes merely eddying in the place where they are located (that is, 
when they find no passages open for them to leave from), and sometimes 
flowing into the opposed muscle. In each of the muscles there are small 
openings through which the spirits may flow from one into the other, and 
which are so arranged that when the spirits coming from the brain to one 
of the muscles are slightly more forceful than those going to the other, 
they open all the passages through which the spirits in the latter can pass 
into the former, and at the same time they close all the passages through 
which the spirits in the former can pass into the latter. In this way all the 
spirits previously contained in the two muscles are gathered very rapidly 
in one of them, thus making it swell and become shorter, while the other 
lengthens and relaxes. 


12. How external objects act upon the sense organs 

We still have to know what causes the spirits not to flow always in the 
same way from the brain to the muscles, but to come sometimes more to 
some muscles than to others. In our case, indeed, one of these causes is 
the activity of the soul (as I shall explain further on). But in addition we 
must note two other causes, which depend solely on the body. The first 
consists in differences in the movements produced in the sense organs by 


Part One 333 


their objects. I have already explained this quite fully in the Optics.! But 
in order that readers of this work should not need to consult any other, I 
shall say once again that there are three things to consider in the nerves. 
First, there is the marrow, or internal substance, which extends in the 
form of tiny fibres from the brain, where they originate, to the extremities 
of the parts of the body to which they are attached. Next, there are the 
membranes surrounding the fibres, which are continuous with those 
surrounding the brain and form little tubes in which the fibres are 
enclosed. Finally, there are the animal spirits which, being carried by 
these tubes from the brain to the muscles, cause the fibres to remain so 
completely free and extended that if anything causes the slightest motion 
in the part of the body where one of the fibres terminates, it thereby 
causes a movement in the part of the brain where the fibre originates, just 
as we make one end of a cord move by pulling the other end. 


13. This action of external objects may direct the spirits into the muscles 
in various different ways 
I explained in the Optics how the objects of sight make themselves 
known to us simply by producing, through the medium of the intervening 
transparent bodies, local motions in the optic nerve-fibres at the back of 
our eyes, and then in the regions of the brain where these nerves 
originate.? I explained too that the objects produce as much variety in 
these motions as they cause us to see in the things, and that it is not the 
motions occurring in the eye, but those occurring in the brain, which 
directly represent these objects to the soul. By this example, it is easy to 
conceive how sounds, smells, tastes, heat, pain, hunger, thirst and, in 
general, all the objects both of our external senses and of our internal 
appetites, also produce some movement in our nerves, which passes 
through them into the brain. Besides causing our soul to have various 
different sensations, these various movements in the brain can also act 
without the soul, causing the spirits to make their way to certain muscles 
rather than others, and so causing them to move our limbs. I shall prove 
this here by one example only. If someone suddenly thrusts his hand in 
front of our eyes as if to strike us, then even if we know that he is our 
friend, that he is doing this only in fun, and that he will take care not to 
harm us, we still find it difficult to prevent ourselves from closing our 
eyes. This shows that it is not through the mediation of our soul that they 
close, since this action is contrary to our volition, which is the only, or at 
least the principal, activity of the soul. They close rather because the 
mechanism of our body is so composed that the movement of the hand 


1 See Optics, p. 165 above, and also Treatise on Man, pp. ror1ff above. 
2 See Optics, p. 167 above. 


338 


339 


340 


341 


334 The Passions of the Soul 


towards our eyes produces another movement in our brain, which directs 
the animal spirits into the muscles that make our eyelids drop. 


14. Differences among the spirits may also cause them to take various 
different courses 

The other cause which serves to direct the animal spirits to the muscles in 
various different ways is the unequal agitation of the spirits and 
differences in their parts. For when some of their parts are coarser and 
more agitated than others, they penetrate more deeply in a straight line 
into the cavities and pores of the brain, and in this way they are directed 
to muscles other than those to which they would go if they had less force. 


15. The causes of these differences 

And this inequality may arise from the different materials of which the 
spirits are composed. One sees this in the case of those who have drunk a 
lot of wine: the vapours of the wine enter the blood rapidly and rise from 
the heart to the brain, where they turn into spirits which, being stronger 
and more abundant than those normally present there, are capable of 
moving the body in many strange ways. Such an inequality of the spirits 
may also arise from various conditions of the heart, liver, stomach, 
spleen and all the other organs that help to produce them. In this 
connection we must first note certain small nerves embedded in the base 
of the heart, which serve to enlarge and contract the openings to its 
cavities, thus causing the blood, according to the strength of its expan- 
sion, to produce spirits having various different dispositions. It must also 
be observed that even though the blood entering the heart comes there 
from every other place in the body, it often happens nevertheless that it is 
driven there more from some parts than from others, because the nerves 
and muscles responsible for these parts exert more pressure on it or make 
it more agitated. And differences in these parts are matched by corres- 
ponding differences in the expansion of the blood in the heart, which 
results in the production of spirits having different qualities. Thus, for 
example, the blood coming from the lower part of the liver, where the 
gall is located, expands in the heart in a different manner from the blood 
coming from the spleen; the latter expands differently from the blood 
coming from the veins of the arms or legs; and this expands differently 
again from the alimentary juices when, just after leaving the stomach and 
bowels, they pass rapidly to the heart through the liver. 


16. How all the limbs can be moved by the objects of the senses and by 
the spirits without the help of the soul 

Finally it must be observed that the mechanism of our body is so 

composed that all the changes occurring in the movement of the spirits 


Part One 335 


may cause them to open some pores in the brain more than others. 
Conversely, when one of the pores is opened somewhat more or less than 
usual by an action of the sensory nerves, this brings about a change in the 
movement of the spirits and directs them to the muscles which serve to 
move the body in the way it is usually moved on the occasion of such an 
action. Thus every movement we make without any contribution from 
our will — as often happens when we breathe, walk, eat and, indeed, 
when we perform any action which is common to us and the beasts — 
depends solely on the arrangement of our limbs and on the route which 
the spirits, produced by the heat of the heart, follow naturally in the 
brain, nerves and muscles. This occurs in the same way as the move- 
ment of a watch is produced merely by the strength of its spring and the 
configuration of its wheels. 


17. The functions of the soul 

Having thus considered all the functions belonging solely to the body, it 
is easy to recognize that there is nothing in us which we must attribute to 
our soul except our thoughts. These are of two principal kinds, some 
being actions of the soul and others its passions. Those I call its actions 
are all our volitions, for we experience them as proceeding directly from 
our soul and as seeming to depend on it alone. On the other hand, the 
various perceptions or modes of knowledge present in us may be called 
its passions, in a general sense, for it is often not our soul which makes 
them such as they are, and the soul always receives them from the things 
that are represented by them. 


18. The will 

Our volitions, in turn, are of two sorts. One consists of the actions of the 
soul which terminate in the soul itself, as when we will to love God or, 
generally speaking, to apply our mind to some object which is not 
material. The other consists of actions which terminate in our body, as 
when our merely willing to walk has the consequence that our legs move 
and we walk. 


19. Perception 

Our perceptions are likewise of two sorts: some have the soul as their 
cause, others the body. Those having the soul as their cause are the 
perceptions of our volitions and of all the imaginings or other thoughts 
which depend on them. For it is certain that we cannot will anything 
without thereby perceiving that we are willing it. And although willing 


342 


343 


344 


345 


336 The Passions of the Soul 


something is an action with respect to our soul, the perception of such 
willing may be said to be a passion in the soul. But because this 
perception is really one and the same thing as the volition, and names are 
always determined by whatever is most noble, we do not normally call it 
a ‘passion’, but solely an ‘action’. 


20. Imaginings and other thoughts formed by the soul 

When our soul applies itself to imagine something non-existent — as in 
thinking about an enchanted palace or a chimera — and also when it 
applies itself to consider something that is purely intelligible and not 
imaginable — for example, in considering its own nature — the perceptions 
it has of these things depend chiefly on the volition which makes it aware 
of them. That is why we usually regard these perceptions as actions 
rather than passions. 


21. Imaginings which are caused solely by the body 

Among the perceptions caused by the body, most of them depend on the 
nerves. But there are some which do not and which, like those I have just 
described, are called ‘imaginings’. These differ from the others, however, 
in that our will is not used in forming them. Accordingly they cannot be 
numbered among the actions of the soul, for they arise simply from the 
fact that the spirits, being agitated in various different ways and coming 
upon the traces of various impressions which have preceded them in the 
brain, make their way by chance through certain pores rather than 
others. Such are the illusions of our dreams and also the day-dreams we 
often have when we are awake and our mind wanders idly without 
applying itself to anything of its own accord. Now some of these 
imaginings are passions of the soul, taking the word ‘passion’ in its 
proper and more exact sense, and all may be regarded as such if the word 
is understood in a more general sense. Nonetheless, their cause is not so 
conspicuous and determinate as that of the perceptions which the soul 
receives by means of the nerves, and they seem to be mere shadows and 
pictures of these perceptions. So before we can characterize them 
satisfactorily we must consider how these other perceptions differ from 
one another. 


22. How these other perceptions differ from one another 
All the perceptions which I have not yet explained come to the soul by 
means of the nerves. They differ from one another in so far as we refer 


Part One 337 


some to external objects which strike our senses, others to our body or to 
certain of its parts, and still others to our soul. 


23. The perceptions we refer to objects outside us 

The perceptions we refer to things outside us, namely to the objects of 
our senses, are caused by these objects, at least when our judgements are 
not false. For in that case the objects produce certain movements in the 
organs of the external senses and, by means of the nerves, produce other 
movements in the brain, which cause the soul to have sensory perception 
of the objects. Thus, when we see the light of a torch and hear the sound 
of a bell, the sound and the light are two different actions which, simply 
by producing two different movements in some of our nerves, and 
through them in our brain, give to the soul two different sensations. And 
we refer these sensations to the subjects we suppose to be their causes in 
such a way that we think that we see the torch itself and hear the bell, and 
not that we have sensory perception merely of movements coming from 
these objects. 


24. The perceptions we refer to our body 

The perceptions we refer to our body or to certain of its parts are those of 
hunger, thirst and other natural appetites. To these we may add pain, 
heat and the other states we feel as being in our limbs, and not as being in 
objects outside us. Thus, at the same time and by means of the same 
nerves we can feel the cold of our hand and the heat of a nearby flame or, 
on the other hand, the heat of our hand and the cold of the air to which it 
is exposed. This happens without there being any difference between the 
actions which make us feel the heat or cold in our hand and those which 
make us feel the heat or cold outside us, except that since one of these 
actions succeeds the other, we judge that the first is already in us, and 
that its successor is not yet there but in the object which causes it. 


25. The perceptions we refer to our soul 

The perceptions we refer only to the soul are those whose effects we feel 
as being in the soul itself, and for which we do not normally know any 
proximate cause to which we can refer them. Such are the feelings of joy, 
anger and the like, which are aroused in us sometimes by the objects 
which stimulate our nerves and sometimes also by other causes. Now all 
our perceptions, both those we refer to objects outside us and those we 
refer to the various states of our body, are indeed passions with respect to 
our soul, so long as we use the term ‘passion’ in its most general sense; 
nevertheless we usually restrict the term to signify only perceptions which 


346 


347 


348 


349 


338 The Passions of the Soul 


refer to the soul itself. And it is only the latter that I have undertaken to 
explain here under the title ‘passions of the soul’.' 


26. The imaginings which depend solely on the fortuitous movement of 
the spirits may be passions just as truly as the perceptions which 
depend on the nerves 

It remains to be noted that everything the soul perceives by means of the 
nerves may also be represented to it through the fortuitous course of the 
spirits. The sole difference is that the impressions which come into the 
brain through the nerves are normally more lively and more definite than 
those produced there by the spirits — a fact that led me to say in article 21 
that the latter are, as it were, a shadow or picture of the former. We must 
also note that this picture is sometimes so similar to the thing it 
represents that it may mislead us regarding the perceptions which refer to 
objects outside us, or even regarding those which refer to certain parts of 
our body. But we cannot be misled in the same way regarding the 
passions, in that they are so close and so internal to our soul that it 
cannot possibly feel them unless they are truly as it feels them to be. Thus 
often when we sleep, and sometimes even when we are awake, we 
imagine certain things so vividly that we think we see them before us, or 
feel them in our body, although they are not there at all. But even if we 
are asleep and dreaming, we cannot feel sad, or moved by any other 
passion, unless the soul truly has this passion within it. 


27. Definition of the passions of the soul 

After having considered in what respects the passions of the soul differ 
from all its other thoughts, it seems to me that we may define them 
generally as those perceptions, sensations or emotions of the soul which 


1 The classification given in articles 17-25 may be represented schematically as follows: 


Thoughts —— actions of the soul (volitions and voluntary imaginings) 


be 
passions of the soul in general sense (perceptions) 


aa. 


caused by the soul caused by the body 
(perception of volition) wee (21) Se 
rie non-neural 
(imaginings) 
ref, ; ie 
ref. to ext. obj. ref. to soul 
(23) (passions in restricted sense) 


(25) 


Part One 339 


we refer particularly to it, and which are caused, maintained and 
strengthened by some movement of the spirits. 


28. Explanation of the first part of this definition 

We may call them ‘perceptions’ if we use this term generally to signify all 
the thoughts which are not actions of the soul or volitions, but not if we 
use it to signify only evident knowledge. For experience shows that those 
who are the most strongly agitated by their passions are not those who 
know them best, and that the passions are to be numbered among the 
perceptions which the close alliance between the soul and the body 
renders confused and obscure. We may also call them ‘sensations’, 
because they are received into the soul in the same way as the objects of 
the external senses, and they are not known by the soul any differently. 
But it is even better to call them ‘emotions’ of the soul, not only because 
this term may be applied to all the changes which occur in the soul — that 
is, to all the various thoughts which come to it — but more particularly 
because, of all the kinds of thought which the soul may have, there are 
none that agitate and disturb it so strongly as the passions. 


29. Explanation of the other part of the definition 

I add that they refer particularly to the soul, in order to distinguish them 
from other sensations, some referred to external objects (e.g. smells, 
sounds and colours) and others to our body (e.g. hunger, thirst and pain). 
I also add that they are caused, maintained and strengthened by some 
movement of the spirits, both in order to distinguish them from our 
volitions (for these too may be called ‘emotions of the soul which refer to 
it’, but they are caused by the soul itself), and also in order to explain 
their ultimate and most proximate cause, which distinguishes them once 
again from other sensations. 


30. The soul is united to all the parts of the body conjointly 

But in order to understand all these things more perfectly, we need to 
recognize that the soul is really joined to the whole body, and that we 
cannot properly say that it exists in any one part of the body to the 
exclusion of the others. For the body is a unity which is in a sense 
indivisible because of the arrangement of its organs, these being so 
related to one another that the removal of any one of them renders the 
whole body defective. And the soul is of such a nature that it has no 
relation to extension, or to the dimensions or other properties of the 
matter of which the body is composed: it is related solely to the whole 
assemblage of the body’s organs. This is obvious from our inability to 
conceive of a half or a third of a soul, or of the extension which a soul 


350 


351 


352 


353 


340 The Passions of the Soul 


occupies. Nor does the soul become any smaller if we cut off some part of 
the body, but it becomes completely separate from the body when we 
break up the assemblage of the body’s organs. 


31. There is a little gland' in the brain where the soul exercises its 

functions more particularly than in the other parts of the body 
We need to recognize also that although the soul is joined to the whole 
body, nevertheless there is a certain part of the body where it exercises its 
functions more particularly than in all the others. It is commonly held 
that this part is the brain, or perhaps the heart — the brain because the 
sense organs are related to it, and the heart because we feel the passions 
as if they were in it. But on carefully examining the matter I think I have 
clearly established that the part of the body in which the soul directly 
exercises its functions is not the heart at all, or the whole of the brain. It is 
rather the innermost part of the brain, which is a certain very small gland 
situated in the middle of the brain’s substance and suspended above the 
passage through which the spirits in the brain’s anterior cavities com- 
municate with those in its posterior cavities. The slightest movements on 
the part of this gland may alter very greatly the course of these spirits, 
and conversely any change, however slight, taking place in the course of 
the spirits may do much to change the movements of the gland. 


32. How we know that this gland is the principal seat of the soul 

Apart from this gland, there cannot be any other place in the whole body 
where the soul directly exercises its functions. | am convinced of this by 
the observation that all the other parts of our brain are double, as also 
are all the organs of our external senses — eyes, hands, ears and so on. But 
in so far as we have only one simple thought about a given object at any 
one time, there must necessarily be some place where the two images 
coming through the two eyes, or the two impressions coming from a 
single object through the double organs of any other sense, can come 
together in a single image or impression before reaching the soul, so that 
they do not present to it two objects instead of one. We can easily 
understand that these images or other impressions are unified in this 
gland by means of the spirits which fill the cavities of the brain. But they 
cannot exist united in this way in any other place in the body except as a 
result of their being united in this gland. 


33. The seat of the passions is not in the heart 

As for the opinion of those who think that the soul receives its passions in 
the heart, this is not worth serious consideration, since it is based solely 
on the fact that the passions make us feel some change in the heart. It is 


1 The pineal gland; see Treatise on Man, p. 100 above. 


Part One 341 


easy to see that the only reason why this change is felt as occurring in the 
heart is that there is a small nerve which descends to it from the brain — 
just as pain is felt as in the foot by means of the nerves in the foot, and the 
stars are perceived as in the sky by means of their light and the optic 
nerves. Thus it is no more necessary that our soul should exercise its 
functions directly in the heart in order to feel its passions there, than that 
it should be in the sky in order to see the stars there. 


34. How the soul and the body act on each other 

Let us therefore take it that the soul has its principal seat in the small 
gland located in the middle of the brain. From there it radiates through 
the rest of the body by means of the animal spirits, the nerves, and even 
the blood, which can take on the impressions of the spirits and carry 
them through the arteries to all the limbs. Let us recall what we said 
previously about the mechanism of our body. The nerve-fibres are so 
distributed in all the parts of the body that when the objects of the senses 
produce various different movements in these parts, the fibres are 
occasioned to open the pores of the brain in various different ways. This, 
in turn, causes the animal spirits contained in these cavities to enter the 
muscles in various different ways. In this manner the spirits can move the 
limbs in all the different ways they are capable of being moved. And all 
the other causes that can move the spirits in different ways are sufficient 
to direct them into different muscles. To this we may now add that the 
small gland which is the principal seat of the soul is suspended within the 
Cavities containing these spirits, so that it can be moved by them in as 
many different ways as there are perceptible differences in the objects. 
But it can also be moved in various different ways by the soul, whose 
nature is such that it receives as many different impressions — that is, it 
has as many different perceptions as there occur different movements in 
this gland. And conversely, the mechanism of our body is so con- 
structed that simply by this gland’s being moved in any way by the soul 
or by any other cause, it drives the surrounding spirits towards the pores 
of the brain, which direct them through the nerves to the muscles; and in 
this way the gland makes the spirits move the limbs. 


35. Example of the way in which the impressions of objects are united in 
the gland in the middle of the brain 
Thus, for example, if we see some animal approaching us, the light 
reflected from its body forms two images, one in each of our eyes; and 
these images form two others, by means of the optic nerves, on the 
internal surface of the brain facing its cavities. Then, by means of the 
spirits that fill these cavities, the images radiate towards the little gland 
which the spirits surround: the movement forming each point of one of 


354 


355 


356 


357 


358 


342 The Passions of the Soul 


the images tends towards the same point on the gland as the movement 
forming the corresponding point of the other image, which represents the 
same part of the animal. In this way, the two images in the brain form 
only one image on the gland, which acts directly upon the soul and makes 
it see the shape of the animal. 


36. Example of the way in which the passions are aroused in the soul 

If, in addition, this shape is very strange and terrifying — that is, if it has a 
close relation to things which have previously been harmful to the body — 
this arouses the passion of anxiety in the soul, and then that of courage or 
perhaps fear and terror, depending upon the particular temperament of 
the body or the strength of the soul, and upon whether we have protected 
ourselves previously by defence or by flight against the harmful things to 
which the present impression is related. Thus in certain persons these 
factors dispose their brain in such a way that some of the spirits reflected 
from the image formed on the gland proceed from there to the nerves 
which serve to turn the back and move the legs in order to flee. The rest 
of the spirits go to nerves which expand or constrict the orifices of the 
heart, or else to nerves which agitate other parts of the body from which 
blood is sent to the heart, so that the blood is rarefied in a different 
manner from usual and spirits are sent to the brain which are adapted for 
maintaining and strengthening the passion of fear — that is, for holding 
Open or re-opening the pores of the brain which direct the spirits into 
these same nerves. For merely by entering into these pores they produce 
in the gland a particular movement which is ordained by nature to make 
the soul feel this passion. And since these pores are related mainly to the 
little nerves which serve to contract or expand the orifices of the heart, 
this makes the soul feel the passion chiefly as if it were in the heart. 


37. How all the passions appear to be caused by some movement of the 
spirits 

Something similar happens with all the other passions. That is, they are 
caused chiefly by the spirits contained in the cavities of the brain making 
their way to nerves which serve to expand or constrict the orifices of the 
heart, or to drive blood towards the heart in a distinctive way from other 
parts of the body, or to maintain the passion in some other way. This 
makes it clear why I included in my definition of the passions that they 
are caused by some particular movement of the spirits. 


38. Example of movements of the body which accompany the passions 
and do not depend on the soul 

Moreover, just as the course which the spirits take to the nerves of the 

heart suffices to induce a movement in the gland through which fear 


Part One 343 


enters the soul, so too the mere fact that some spirits at the same time 
proceed to the nerves which serve to move the legs in flight causes 
another movement in the gland through which the soul feels and 
perceives this action. In this way, then, the body may be moved to take 
flight by the mere disposition of the organs, without any contribution 
from the soul. 


39. How one and the same cause may excite different passions in 
different people 

The same impression which the presence of a terrifying object forms on 
the gland, and which causes fear in some people, may excite courage and 
boldness in others. The reason for this is that brains are not all 
constituted in the same way. Thus the very same movement of the gland 
which in some excites fear, in others causes the spirits to enter the pores 
of the brain which direct them partly into nerves which serve to move the 
hands in self-defence and partly into those which agitate the blood and 
drive it towards the heart in the manner required to produce spirits 
appropriate for continuing this defence and for maintaining the will to do 
SO. 


40. The principal effect of the passions 

For it must be observed that the principal effect of all the human passions 
is that they move and dispose the soul to want the things for which they 
prepare the body. Thus the feeling of fear moves the soul to want to flee, 
that of courage to want to fight, and similarly with the others. 


41. The power of the soul with respect to the body 

But the will is by its nature so free that it can never be constrained. Of the 
two kinds of thought I have distinguished in the soul — the first its 
actions, i.e. its volitions, and the second its passions, taking this word in 
its most general sense to include every kind of perception — the former are 
absolutely within its power and can be changed only indirectly by the 
body, whereas the latter are absolutely dependent on the actions which 
produce them, and can be changed by the soul only indirectly, except 
when it is itself their cause. And the activity of the soul consists entirely in 
the fact that simply by willing something it brings it about that the little 
gland to which it is closely joined moves in the manner required to 
produce the effect corresponding to this volition. 


42. How we find in our memory the things we want to remember 
Thus, when the soul wants to remember something, this volition makes 
the gland lean first to one side and then to another, thus driving the 


359 


360 


361 


362 


344 The Passions of the Soul 


spirits towards different regions of the brain until they come upon the 
one containing traces left by the object we want to remember. These 
traces consist simply in the fact that the pores of the brain through which 
the spirits previously made their way owing to the presence of this object 
have thereby become more apt than the others to be opened in the same 
way when the spirits again flow towards them. And so the spirits enter 
into these pores more easily when they come upon them, thereby 
producing in the gland that special movement which represents the same 
object to the soul, and makes it recognize the object as the one it wanted 
to remember. 


43. How the soul can imagine, be attentive, and move the body 

When we want to imagine something we have never seen, this volition 
has the power to make the gland move in the way required for driving the 
spirits towards the pores of the brain whose opening enables the thing to 
be represented. Again, when we want to fix our attention for some time 
on some particular object, this volition keeps the gland leaning in one 
particular direction during that time. And finally, when we want to walk 
or move our body in some other way, this volition makes the gland drive 
the spirits to the muscles which serve to bring about this effect. 


44. Each volition is naturally joined to some movement of the gland, but 
through effort or habit we may join it to others 
Yet our volition to produce some particular movement or other effect 
does not always result in our producing it; for that depends on the 
various ways in which nature or habit has joined certain movements of 
the gland to certain thoughts. For example, if we want to adjust our eyes 
to look at a far-distant object, this volition causes the pupils to grow 
larger; and if we want to adjust them to look at a very near object, this 
volition makes the pupils contract. But if we think only of enlarging the 
pupils, we may indeed have such a volition, but we do not thereby 
enlarge them. For the movement of the gland, whereby the spirits 
are driven to the optic nerve in the way required for enlarging or 
contracting the pupils, has been joined by nature with the volition to look 
at distant or nearby objects, rather than with the volition to enlarge or 
contract the pupils. Again, when we speak, we think only of the meaning 
of what we want to say, and this makes us move our tongue and lips 
much more readily and effectively than if we thought of moving them in 
all the ways required for uttering the same words. For the habits acquired 
in learning to speak have made us join the action of the soul (which, by 
means of the gland, can move the tongue and lips) with the meaning of 


Part One 345 


the words which follow upon these movements, rather than with the 
movements themselves. 


45. The power of the soul with respect to its passions 

Our passions, too, cannot be directly aroused or suppressed by the action 
of our will, but only indirectly through the representation of things which 
are usually joined with the passions we wish to have and opposed to the 
passions we wish to reject. For example, in order to arouse boldness and 
suppress fear in ourselves, it is not sufficient to have the volition to do so. 
We must apply ourselves to consider the reasons, objects, or precedents 
which persuade us that the danger is not great; that there is always more 
security in defence than in flight; that we shall gain glory and joy if we 
conquer, whereas we can expect nothing but regret and shame if we flee; 
and so on. 


46. What prevents the soul from having full control over its passions 
There is one special reason why the soul cannot readily change or 
suspend its passions, which is what led me to say in my definition that the 
passions are not only caused but also maintained and strengthened by 
some particular movement of the spirits. The reason is that they are 
nearly all accompanied by some disturbance which takes place in the 
heart and consequently also throughout the blood and the animal spirits. 
Until this disturbance ceases they remain present to our mind in the same 
way as the objects of the senses are present to it while they are acting 
upon our sense organs. The soul can prevent itself from hearing a slight 
noise or feeling a slight pain by attending very closely to some other 
thing, but it cannot in the same way prevent itself from hearing thunder 
or feeling a fire that burns the hand. Likewise it can easily overcome the 
lesser passions, but not the stronger and more violent ones, except after 
the disturbance of the blood and spirits has died down. The most the will 
can do while this disturbance is at its full strength is not to yield to its 
effects and to inhibit many of the movements to which it disposes the 
body. For example, if anger causes the hand to rise to strike a blow, the 
will can usually restrain it; if fear moves the legs in flight, the will can 
stop them; and similarly in other cases. 


47. The conflicts that are usually supposed to occur between the lower 
part and the higher part of the soul 

All the conflicts usually supposed to occur between the lower part of the 

soul, which we call ‘sensitive’, and the higher or ‘rational’ part of the soul 

— or between the natural appetites and the will — consist simply in the 


363 


364 


365 


366 


346 The Passions of the Soul 


opposition between the movements which the body (by means of its 
spirits) and the soul (by means of its will) tend to produce at the same 
time in the gland. For there is within us but one soul, and this soul has 
within it no diversity of parts: it is at once sensitive and rational too, and 
all its appetites are volitions. It is an error to identify the different 
functions of the soul with persons who play different, usually mutually 
opposed roles — an error which arises simply from our failure to 
distinguish properly the functions of the soul from those of the body. It is 
to the body alone that we should attribute everything that can be 
observed in us to oppose our reason. So there is no conflict here except in 
so far as the little gland in the middle of the brain can be pushed to one 
side by the soul and to the other side by the animal spirits (which, as | 
said above, are nothing but bodies), and these two impulses often happen 
to be opposed, the stronger cancelling the effect of the weaker. Now we 
may distinguish two kinds of movement produced in the gland by the 
spirits. Movements of the first kind represent to the soul the objects 
which stimulate the senses, or the impressions occurring in the brain; and 
these have no influence on the will. Movements of the second kind, which 
do have an influence on the will, cause the passions or the bodily 
movements which accompany the passions. As to the first, although they 
often hinder the actions of the soul, or are hindered by them, yet since 
they are not directly opposed to these actions, we observe no conflict 
between them. We observe conflict only between movements of the 
second kind and the volitions which oppose them — for example, between 
the force with which the spirits push the gland so as to cause the soul to 
desire something, and the force with which the soul, by its volition to 
avoid this thing, pushes the gland in a contrary direction. Such a conflict 
is revealed chiefly through the fact that the will, lacking the power to 
produce the passions directly (as I have already said), is compelled to 
make an effort to consider a series of different things, and if one of them 
happens to have the power to change for a moment the course of the 
spirits, the next one may happen to lack this power, whereupon the 
spirits will immediately revert to the same course because no change has 
occurred in the state of the nerves, heart and blood. This makes the soul 
feel itself impelled, almost at one and the same time, to desire and not to 
desire one and the same thing; and that is why it has been thought that 
the soul has within it two conflicting powers. We may, however, 
acknowledge a kind of conflict, in so far as the same cause that produces 
a certain passion in the soul often also produces certain movements in the 
body, to which the soul makes no contribution and which the soul stops 
or tries to stop as soon as it perceives them. We experience this when 
an object that excites fear also causes the spirits to enter the muscles 


Part One 347 


which serve to move our legs in flight, while the will to be bold stops 
them from moving. 


48. How we recognize the strength or weakness of souls, and what is 
wrong with the weakest souls 

It is by success in these conflicts that each person can recognize the 
strength or weakness of his soul. For undoubtedly the strongest souls 
belong to those in whom the will by nature can most easily conquer the 
passions and stop the bodily movements which accompany them. But 
there are some who can never test the strength of their will because they 
never equip it to fight with its proper weapons, giving it instead only the 
weapons which some passions provide for resisting other passions. What 
I call its ‘proper’ weapons are firm and determinate judgements bearing 
upon the knowledge of good and evil, which the soul has resolved to 
follow in guiding its conduct. The weakest souls of all are those whose 
will is not determined in this way to follow such judgements, but 
constantly allows itself to be carried away by present passions. The 
latter, being often opposed to one another, pull the will first to one side 
and then to the other, thus making it battle against itself and so putting 
the soul in the most deplorable state possible. Thus, when fear represents 
death as an extreme evil which can be avoided only by flight, while 
ambition on the other hand depicts the dishonour of flight as an evil 
worse than death, these two passions jostle the will in opposite ways; and 
since the will obeys first the one and then the other, it is continually 
opposed to itself, and so it renders the soul enslaved and miserable. 


49. The strength of the soul is inadequate without knowledge of the 
truth 

It is true that very few people are so weak and irresolute that they choose 
only what their passion dictates. Most have some determinate judge- 
ments which they follow in regulating some of their actions. Often these 
judgements are false and based on passions by which the will has 
previously allowed itself to be conquered or led astray; but because the 
will continues to follow them when the passion which caused them is 
absent, they may be considered its proper weapons, and we may judge 
souls to be stronger or weaker according to their ability to follow these 
judgements more or less closely and resist the present passions which are 
opposed to them. There is, however, a great difference between the 
resolutions which proceed from some false opinion and those which are 
based solely on knowledge of the truth. For, anyone who follows the 
latter is assured of never regretting or repenting, whereas we always 
regret having followed the former when we discover our error. 


367 


368 


369 


370 


348 The Passions of the Soul 


50. There is no soul so weak that it cannot, if well-directed, acquire an 
absolute power over its passions 

It is useful to note here, as already mentioned above,! that although 
nature seems to have joined every movement of the gland to certain of 
our thoughts from the beginning of our life, yet we may join them to 
others through habit. Experience shows this in the case of language. 
Words produce in the gland movements which are ordained by nature to 
represent to the soul only the sounds of their syllables when they are 
spoken or the shape of their letters when they are written, because we 
have acquired the habit of thinking of this meaning when we hear them 
spoken or see them written. It is also useful to note that although the 
movements (both of the gland and of the spirits and the brain) which 
represent certain objects to the soul are naturally joined to the move- 
ments which produce certain passions in it, yet through habit the former 
can be separated from the latter and joined to others which are very 
different. Indeed this habit can be acquired by a single action and does 
not require long practice. Thus, when we unexpectedly come upon 
something very foul in a dish we are eating with relish, our surprise may 
so change the disposition of our brain that we cannot afterwards look 
upon any such food without repulsion, whereas previously we ate it with 
pleasure. And the same may be observed in animals. For although they 
lack reason, and perhaps even thought, all the movements of the spirits 
and of the gland which produce passions in us are nevertheless present in 
them too, though in them they serve to maintain and strengthen only the 
movements of the nerves and the muscles which usually accompany the 
passions and not, as in us, the passions themselves. So when a dog sees a 
partridge, it is naturally disposed to run towards it; and when it hears a 
gun fired, the noise naturally impels it to run away. Nevertheless, setters 
are commonly trained so that the sight of a partridge makes them stop, 
and the noise they hear afterwards, when someone fires at the bird, 
makes them run towards it. These things are worth noting in order to 
encourage each of us to make a point of controlling our passions. For 
since we are able, with a little effort, to change the movements of the 
brain in animals devoid of reason, it is evident that we can do so still 
more effectively in the case of men. Even those who have the weakest 
souls could acquire absolute mastery over all their passions if we 
employed sufficient ingenuity in training and guiding them. 


1 Art. 44, p. 344 above. 


PART TWO 


The Number and Order of the Passions 
and explanation of the six primitive passions 


51. The primary causes of the passions 

From what has been said above we know that the ultimate and most 
proximate cause of the passions of the soul is simply the agitation by 
which the spirits move the little gland in the middle of the brain. But this 
does not enable us to distinguish between the various passions: for that, 
we must investigate their origins and examine their first causes. They may 
sometimes be caused by an action of the soul when it sets itself to 
conceive some object or other, or by the mere temperament of the body 
or by the impressions which happen to be present in the brain, as when 
we feel sad or joyful without being able to say why. From what has been 
said, however, it appears that all such passions may also be excited by 
objects which stimulate the senses, and that these objects are their 
principal and most common causes. From this it follows that, in order to 
discover all the passions, it suffices to consider all the effects of these 
objects. 


52. The function of the passions, and how they may be enumerated 

I observe, moreover, that the objects which stimulate the senses do not 
excite different passions in us because of differences in the objects, but 
only because of the various ways in which they may harm or benefit us, 
or in general have importance for us. The function of all the passions 
consists solely in this, that they dispose our soul to want the things which 
nature deems useful for us, and to persist in this volition; and the same 
agitation of the spirits which normally causes the passions also disposes 
the body to make movements which help us to attain these things. That is 
why an enumeration of the passions requires only an orderly examina- 
tion of all the various ways having importance for us in which our senses 
can be stimulated by their objects. And I shall now enumerate all the 
principal passions according to the order in which they may thus be 
found. 


349 


371 


372 


373 


374 


375 


350 The Passions of the Soul 


THE ORDER AND ENUMERATION OF THE PASSIONS 


53. Wonder 

When our first encounter with some object surprises us and we find it 
novel, or very different from what we formerly knew or from what we 
supposed it ought to be, this causes us to wonder and to be astonished at 
it. Since all this may happen before we know whether or not the object is 
beneficial to us, I regard wonder as the first of all the passions. It has no 
opposite, for, if the object before us has no characteristics that surprise 
us, we are not moved by it at all and we consider it without passion. 


54. Esteem and contempt, generosity or pride, and humility or 
abjectness 

Wonder is joined to either esteem or contempt, depending on whether we 

wonder at the value of an object or at its insignificance. Thus we may 

have esteem or contempt for ourselves; this gives rise to the passions of 

magnanimity or vanity and humility or abjectness, and then to the 

corresponding habits. 


55. Veneration and scorn 

But when our esteem or contempt is directed upon some other object that 
we regard as a free cause capable of doing good and evil, esteem becomes 
veneration and simple contempt becomes scorn. 


56. Love and hatred 
All the preceding passions may be produced in us without our perceiving 
in any way whether the object causing them is good or evil. But when we 
think of something as good with regard to us, i.e. as beneficial to us, this 
makes us have love for it; and when we think of it as evil or harmful, this 
arouses hatred in us. 


57. Desire 

This same consideration of good and evil is the origin of all the other 
passions. But in order to put them in order I shall take time into account; 
and seeing that they lead us to look much more to the future than to the 
present or the past, I begin with desire. For it is obvious that this passion 
always concerns the future. This holds in every case involving desire — not 
only when we desire to acquire a good which we do not yet possess or to 
avoid an evil which we judge may occur, but also when we merely wish 
for the preservation of a good or the absence of an evil. 


58. Hope, anxiety, jealousy, confidence and despair 
We are prompted to desire the acquisition of a good or the avoidance of 
an evil simply if we think it possible to acquire the good or avoid the evil. 


Part Two 351 


But when we go beyond this and consider whether there is much or little 
prospect of our getting what we desire, then whatever points to the 
former excites hope in us, and whatever points to the latter excites 
anxiety (of which jealousy is one variety). When hope is extreme, it 
changes its nature and is called ‘confidence’ or ‘assurance’ just as, on the 
other hand, extreme anxiety becomes despair. 


59. Irresolution, courage, boldness, emulation, timidity and terror 
Thus we may hope and fear, even though the expected outcome does not 
depend on us at all. But when we think of it as dependent on us we may 
have some difficulty in deciding upon the means or in putting them into 
effect. The first difficulty gives rise to irresolution, which makes us 
disposed to deliberate and take advice; the second is opposed by courage 
or boldness, of which emulation is one variety. And timidity is 
contrary to courage, as fear or terror is to boldness. 


60. Remorse 

If we decide upon some course of action before the irresolution has 
ceased, this causes remorse of conscience to arise. Unlike the preceding 
passions, remorse does not concern the time to come, but rather the 
present or the past. 


61. Joy and sadness 

Consideration of a present good arouses joy in us, and consideration of a 
present evil arouses sadness, when the good or evil is one that we regard 
as belonging to us. 


62. Derision, envy, pity 

But when we think of the good or evil as belonging to other people, we 
may judge them worthy or unworthy of it. When we judge them worthy 
of it, that arouses in us solely the passion of joy, in so far as we get some 
benefit from seeing things happen as they ought; and the joy aroused in 
the case of a good differs from that aroused in the case of an evil only in 
that the former is serious whereas the latter is accompanied by laughter 
and derision. But if we judge the others unworthy of the good or evil, in 
the former case envy is aroused and in the latter case pity — envy and pity 
being species of sadness. And it should be observed that the same 
passions which relate to present goods or evils may often also be related 
to those which are yet to come, in so far as we think of a good or evil as if 
it were present when we judge that it will come about. 


63. Self-satisfaction and repentance 
We may also consider the cause of a good or evil, present as well as past. 
A good done by ourselves gives us an internal satisfaction, which is the 


376 


S77 


378 


379 


352 The Passions of the Soul 


sweetest of all the passions, whereas an evil produces repentance, which 
is the most bitter. 


64. Favour and gratitude 

But a good done by others causes us to regard them with favour, even if it 
was not done to us; and if it was done to us then we join gratitude to the 
favour. 


65. Indignation and anger 

In the same way, an evil done by others and having no relation to us 
merely causes us to feel indignation towards them; and when it is related 
to us, it stirs up anger as well. 


66. Pride and shame 

Further, a good or evil which is in us, or which has been in us, produces 
pride or shame respectively, when it is related to the opinion which 
others may have of it. 


67. Disgust, regret and cheerfulness 
Sometimes the persistence of the good causes boredom or disgust, 
whereas that of the evil diminishes sadness. Finally, a past good gives rise 
to regret, which is a kind of sadness; and a past evil gives rise to 
cheerfulness, which is a kind of joy. 


68. Why this enumeration of the passions differs from the one 
commonly accepted 

This order seems to me the best for an enumeration of the passions. I am 
well aware that here I part company with the opinion of all who have 
written previously about the passions. But I do so for good reason. For 
they derive their enumeration from a distinction they draw, within the 
sensitive part of the soul, between the two appetites they call ‘concupi- 
scible’ and ‘irascible’.' As I have said already, I recognize no distinction 
of parts within the soul; so I think their distinction amounts merely to 
saying that the soul has two powers, one of desire and the other of anger. 
But since the soul has in the same way the powers of wonder, love, hope 
and anxiety, and hence the power to receive in itself every other passion, 
or to perform the actions to which the passions impel it, I do not see why 
they have chosen to refer them all to desire or to anger. And besides, their 
enumeration does not include all the principal passions, as I believe mine 
does. I speak only of the principal passions, because we might still 


1 A distinction based on that made by Plato, in Book Iv of the Republic, between the 
‘irascible’ and ‘concupiscent’ parts of the soul. 


Part Two 353 


distinguish many other more specific ones — indeed an unlimited number 
of them. 


69. There are only six primitive passions 

But the number of those which are simple and primitive is not very large. 
Indeed, in reviewing all those I have enumerated, we can easily see that 
there are only six of this kind — namely, wonder, love, hatred, desire, joy 
and sadness. All the others are either composed from some of these six or 
they are species of them. That is why, to ensure that readers are not 
confused by the multiplicity of the passions, I shall treat the six primitive 
passions separately, and then I shall show how all the others originate in 
them. 


70. Wonder: its definition and cause 

Wonder is a sudden surprise of the soul which brings it to consider with 
attention the objects that seem to it unusual and extraordinary. It has 
two causes: first, an impression in the brain, which represents the 
object as something unusual and consequently worthy of special 
consideration; and secondly, a movement of the spirits, which the 
impression disposes both to flow with great force to the place in the brain 
where it is located so as to strengthen and preserve it there, and also to 
pass into the muscles which serve to keep the sense organs fixed in the 
same orientation so that they will continue to maintain the impression in 
the way in which they formed it. 


71. In this passion there occurs no change in the heart or in the blood 

It is a peculiarity of this passion that we do not find it accompanied by 
any change in the heart or in the blood, such as occurs in the case of the 
other passions. The reason for this is that it has as its object not good or 
evil, but only knowledge of the thing that we wonder at. Hence it has no 
relation with the heart and blood, on which depends the whole well- 
being of our body, but only with the brain, in which are located the 
organs of the senses used in gaining this knowledge. 


72. What the strength of wonder consists in 

This does not prevent it from having considerable strength because of the 
element of surprise, i.e. the sudden and unexpected arrival of the 
impression which changes the movement of the spirits. Such surprise is 
proper and peculiar to this passion, so that when it is found in the other 
passions — and it normally occurs in and augments almost all of them — 
this is because wonder is joined with them. Its strength depends on two 
things: the novelty and the fact that the movement it causes is at full 


380 


381 


382 


383 


384 


354 The Passions of the Soul 


strength right from the start. For it is certain that such a movement has 
more effect than one which, being weak initially and increasing only 
gradually, may easily be diverted. It is also certain that objects of the 
senses that are novel affect the brain in certain parts where it is not 
normally affected; and that since these parts are more tender or less firm 
than those hardened through frequent agitation, the effects of the 
movements produced in them are thereby increased. You will find this all 
the more plausible if you consider that something similar accounts for the 
fact that in walking we have very little feeling of any contact in our feet, 
since the weight of our body has accustomed the soles of our feet to a 
contact that is quite hard; whereas when someone tickles our feet, 
although the contact is much lighter and gentler, we find this almost 
unbearable simply because it is not part of our ordinary experience. 


73. What astonishment is 

This element of surprise causes the spirits in the cavities of the brain to 
make their way to the place where the impression of the object of wonder 
is located. It has so much power to do this that sometimes it drives all the 
spirits there, and makes them so wholly occupied with the preservation 
of this impression that none of them pass thence into the muscles or even 
depart from the tracks they originally followed in the brain. As a result 
the whole body remains as immobile as a statue, making it possible for 
only the side of the object originally presented to be perceived, and hence 
impossible for a more detailed knowledge of the object to be acquired. 
This is what we commonly call ‘being astonished’. Astonishment is an 
excess of wonder, and it can never be other than bad. 


74. How the passions are useful, and how they are harmful 

From what has been said it is easy to recognize that the utility of all the 
passions consists simply in the fact that they strengthen and prolong 
thoughts in the soul which it is good for the soul to preserve and which 
otherwise might easily be erased from it. Likewise the harm they may 
cause consists entirely in their strengthening and preserving these 
thoughts beyond what is required, or in their strengthening and preserv- 
ing others on which it is not good to dwell. 


75. How wonder, in particular, is useful 

Of wonder, in particular, we may say that it is useful in that it makes us 
learn and retain in our memory things of which we were previously 
ignorant. For we wonder only at what appears to us unusual and 
extraordinary; and something can appear so only because we have been 
ignorant of it, or perhaps because it differs from things we have known 


Part Two 355 


(this difference being what makes us call it ‘extraordinary’). But when 
something previously unknown to us comes before our intellect or our 
senses for the first time, this does not make us retain it in our memory 
unless our idea of it is strengthened in our brain by some passion, or 
perhaps also by an application of our intellect as fixed by our will in a 
special state of attention and reflection. The other passions may serve to 
make us take note of things which appear good or evil, but we feel only 
wonder at things which merely appear unusual. So we see that people 
who are not naturally inclined to wonder are usually very ignorant. 


76. In what ways it can be harmful, and how we can make good its 
deficiency and correct its excess 

But more often we wonder too much rather than too little, as when we 
are astonished in looking at things which merit little or no consideration. 
This may entirely prevent or pervert the use of reason. Therefore, 
although it is good to be born with some inclination to wonder, since it 
makes us disposed to acquire scientific knowledge, yet after acquiring 
such knowledge we must attempt to free ourselves from this inclination 
as much as possible. For we may easily make good its absence through 
that special state of reflection and attention which our will can always 
impose upon our understanding when we judge the matter before us to 
be worth serious consideration. But there is no remedy for excessive 
wonder except to acquire the knowledge of many things and to practise 
examining all those which may seem most unusual and strange. 


77. It isnot the most stupid or clever people who are most carried away 
by wonder 

Moreover, although it is only the dull and stupid who are not naturally 

disposed to wonder, this does not mean that those with the best minds 

are always the most inclined to it. In fact those most inclined to it are 

chiefly people who, though equipped with excellent common sense, have 

no high opinion of their abilities. 


78. Excessive wonder may become a habit when we fail to correct it 

This passion seems to diminish with use, for the more we encounter 
unusual things which we wonder at, the more we find ourselves 
accustomed to stop wondering at them and to regard any we subsequent- 
ly come upon as common. Nevertheless, when it is excessive and makes 
us fix our attention solely on the first image of the objects before us 
without acquiring any further knowledge about them, it leaves behind a 
habit which makes the soul disposed to dwell in the same way on every 
other object coming before it which appears at all novel. This is what 


385 


386 


387 


388 


356 The Passions of the Soul 


prolongs the troubles of those afflicted with blind curiosity, i.e. those 
who seek out rarities simply in order to wonder at them and not in order 
to know them. For gradually they become so full of wonder that things of 
no importance are no less apt to arrest their attention than those whose 
investigation is more useful. 


79. The definitions of love and hatred 

Love is an emotion of the soul caused by a movement of the spirits, which 
impels the soul to join itself willingly to objects that appear to be 
agreeable to it. And hatred is an emotion caused by the spirits, which 
impels the soul to want to be separated from objects which are presented 
to it as harmful. I say that these emotions are caused by the spirits not 
only in order to distinguish love and hatred (which are passions and 
depend on the body) from judgements which also bring the soul to join 
itself willingly to things it deems bad, but also to distinguish them from 
the emotions which these judgements produce in the soul. 


80. What it is to join or separate oneself willingly 

Moreover, in using the word ‘willingly’ I am not speaking of desire, 
which is a completely separate passion relating to the future. I mean 
rather the assent by which we consider ourselves henceforth as joined 
with what we love in such a manner that we imagine a whole, of which 
we take ourselves to be only one part, and the thing loved to be the other. 
In the case of hatred, on the other hand, we consider ourselves alone as a 
whole entirely separated from the thing for which we have an aversion. 


81. The distinction usually made between concupiscent love and 
benevolent love 

A distinction is commonly made between two sorts of love, one called 
‘benevolent love’, which prompts us to wish for the well-being of what 
we love, and the other called ‘concupiscent love’, which makes us desire 
the things we love. But it seems to me that this distinction concerns only 
the effects of love and not its essence. For as soon as we have joined 
ourselves willingly to some object, whatever its nature may be, we feel 
benevolent towards it — that is, we also join to it willingly the things we 
believe to be agreeable to it: this is one of the principal effects of love. 
And if we judge that it would be beneficial to possess an object or to be 
associated with it in some manner other than willingly, then we desire it: 
and this, too, is one of the most common effects of love. 


82. How very different passions agree in that they partake of love 
Nor do we need to distinguish as many kinds of love as there are different 


Part Two 357 


possible objects of love. Consider, for example, the passions which an 
ambitious man has for glory, a miser for money, a drunkard for wine, a 
brutish man for a woman he wants to violate, an honourable man for 
his friend or mistress, and a good father for his children. Although very 
different from one another, these passions are similar in so far as they all 
partake of love. But the men in the first four examples have love only for 
the possession of the objects to which their passion is related, and not for 
the objects themselves: for these objects they have merely desire mingled 
with other particular passions. Whereas the love of a good father for his 
children is so pure that he desires to have nothing from them, and he 
wants neither to possess them otherwise than he does, nor to be joined to 
them more closely than he already is. He regards them, rather, as other 
parts of himself, and seeks their good as he does his own, or even more 
assiduously. For he imagines that he and they together form a whole of 
which he is not the better part, and so he often puts their interests before 
his own and is not afraid of sacrificing himself in order to save them. The 
affection which an honourable man has for his friends is of the same 
nature, though it is rarely so perfect; and the affection he has for his 
mistress partakes largely of love, but also a little of desire. 


83. The difference between simple affection, friendship and devotion 

We may, I think, more reasonably distinguish kinds of love according to 
the esteem which we have for the object we love, as compared with 
ourselves. For when we have less esteem for it than for ourselves, we have 
only a simple affection for it; when we esteem it equally with ourselves, 
that is called ‘friendship’; and when we have more esteem for it, our 
passion may be called ‘devotion’. Thus, we may have affection for a 
flower, a bird, or a horse; but unless our mind is very disordered, we can 
have friendship only for persons. They are so truly the objects of this 
passion that there is no person so imperfect that we could not have for 
him a very perfect friendship, given that we believe ourselves loved by 
him and that we have a truly noble and generous soul (in accordance 
with the explanation given below in articles 154 and 156). As for 
devotion, its principal object is undoubtedly the supreme Deity, for whom 
we cannot fail to have devotion when we know him as we ought. But we 
may also have devotion for our sovereign, our country, our town, and 
even for a particular person when we have much more esteem for him 
than for ourselves. The difference between these three kinds of love is 
revealed chiefly by their effects. For in all of them we consider ourselves 
as joined and united to the thing loved, and so we are always ready to 
abandon the lesser part of the whole that we compose with it so as to 
preserve the other part. In the case of simple affection this results in our 


389 


390 


391 


392 


358 The Passions of the Soul 


always preferring ourselves to the object of our love. In the case of 
devotion, on the other hand, we prefer the thing loved so strongly that we 
are not afraid to die in order to preserve it. We have often seen examples 
of such devotion in those who have exposed themselves to certain death 
in defence of their sovereign or their city, or sometimes even for 
particular persons to whom they were devoted. 


84. There are not so many kinds of hatred as of love 

Moreover, although hatred is directly opposed to love, we do not 
distinguish it into as many kinds because the evils from which we are 
separated willingly do not differ so noticeably from one another as do the 
goods to which we are joined willingly. 


85. Attraction and repulsion 

I find only one important distinction which is similar in both love and 
hatred. It consists in the fact that the objects both of love and of hatred 
may be represented to the soul either by the external senses, or by the 
internal senses and its own reason. For we commonly call something 
‘good’ or ‘evil’ if our internal senses or our reason make us judge it 
agreeable or contrary to our nature. But we call something ‘beautiful’ or 
‘ugly’ if it is represented as such by our external senses (chiefly by the 
sense of sight, of which we take more notice than of all the others). Two 
kinds of love arise from this, namely the love we have for good things and 
the love we have for beautiful things. To the latter we may give the name 
‘attraction’, so as not to confuse it with the former or with desire (to 
which we often give the name ‘love’). Two kinds of hatred arise in the 
same way, one relating to evil things and the other to things that are ugly; 
and the latter may be called ‘repulsion’ or ‘aversion’, so as to set it apart. 
But what is most noteworthy here is that the passions of attraction and 
repulsion are usually more violent than the other kinds of love and 
hatred, because what enters the soul through the senses affects it more 
strongly than what is represented to it by its reason. At the same time, 
these passions usually contain less truth than the others. Consequently 
they are the most deceptive of all the passions, and the ones against 
which we must guard ourselves most carefully. 


86. The definition of desire 

The passion of desire is an agitation of the soul caused by the spirits, 
which disposes the soul to wish, in the future, for the things it represents 
to itself as agreeable. Thus we desire not only the presence of goods 
which are absent but also the preservation of those which are present. In 


Part Two 359 


addition we desire the absence of evils, both those that already affect us 
and those we believe we may suffer on some future occasion. 


87. Desire is a passion which has no opposite 

I am well aware that in the Schools they commonly contrast the passion 
which leads to the search for good with that which leads to the avoidance 
of evil, calling the former alone ‘desire’ and the latter ‘aversion’. But there 
is no good whose privation is not an evil, and no evil (considered as a 
positive thing) whose privation is not a good. In pursuing riches, for 
example, we necessarily avoid poverty, while in avoiding illness we 
pursue health, and likewise in other cases. Thus I think it is always one 
and the same movement which gives rise to the pursuit of a good and at 
the same time the avoidance of the opposite evil. I note only this 
difference, that the desire we have when we are led towards some good is 
accompanied by love, and then by hope and joy, whereas when we are 
led to get away from the evil opposed to this good, the same desire is 
accompanied by hatred, anxiety and sadness (which causes us to judge 
the evil inimical to ourselves). But if we wish to consider the desire when 
it relates at the same time both to the pursuit of some good and equally to 
the avoidance of the opposed evil, we can see very clearly that a single 
passion brings about both the one and the other. 


88. The various kinds of desire 

It would be more reasonable to distinguish desire into as many different 
species as there are different objects that we pursue. Curiosity, for 
example, is nothing but a desire for knowledge, and it differs greatly from 
a desire for glory, as the latter differs from a desire for vengeance, and 
likewise for other desires. But it is sufficient to note here that there are as 
many species of desire as of love or hatred, and that the most important 
and strongest desires are those which arise from attraction and repulsion. 


89. The desire which arises from repulsion 

Now although, as already mentioned, it is one and the same desire which 
leads to the pursuit of a good and to the avoidance of the opposite evil, 
yet the desire which arises from attraction is very different from that 
which arises from repulsion. For attraction and repulsion, which are 
indeed opposites, are not the good and the evil which serve as objects of 
these desires. Rather, they are simply two emotions of the soul which 
dispose it to pursue two very different things. On the one hand, repulsion 
is ordained by nature to represent to the soul a sudden and unexpected 
death. Thus, although it is sometimes merely the touch of an earthworm, 


393 


394 


395 


396 


397 


360 The Passions of the Soul 


the sound of a rustling leaf, or our shadow that gives rise to repulsion, we 
feel at once as much emotion as if we had experienced a threat of certain 
death. This produces a sudden agitation which leads the soul to do its 
utmost to avoid so manifest an evil. It is this kind of desire that we 
commonly call ‘avoidance’ or ‘aversion’. 


90. The desire which arises from attraction 

Attraction, on the other hand, is specially ordained by nature to represent 
the enjoyment of that which attracts us as the greatest of all the goods 
belonging to mankind, and so to make us have a burning desire for this 
enjoyment. It is true that there are different sorts of attraction, and that 
the desires arising from them are not all equally powerful. Thus, for 
example, the beauty of flowers moves us only to look at them, and that of 
fruits to eat them. But the principal attraction comes from the perfections 
we imagine in a person who we think capable of becoming a second self. 
For nature has established a difference of sex in human beings, as in 
animals lacking reason, and with this she has also implanted certain 
impressions in the brain which bring it about that at a certain age and 
time we regard ourselves as deficient — as forming only one half of a 
whole, whose other half must be a person of the opposite sex. In this way 
nature represents, in a confused manner, the acquisition of this other half 
as the greatest of all goods imaginable. Although we see many persons of 
the opposite sex, yet we do not desire many at any one time, since nature 
does not make us imagine that we need more than one other half. But 
when we observe something in one of them which is more attractive than 
anything we observe at that moment in the others, this determines our 
soul to feel towards that one alone all the inclination which nature gives 
it to pursue the good which it represents as the greatest we could possibly 
possess. The name ‘love’ is applied more often to the inclination or desire 
which arises in this way from attraction than to the passion of love 
described previously. Having stranger effects than the passion, this 
inclination or desire provides writers of romances and poets with their 
principal subject-matter. 


91. The definition of joy 

Joy is a pleasant emotion which the soul has when it enjoys a good which 
impressions in the brain represent to it as its own. I say that the soul has 
this emotion when it enjoys a good, for in fact the soul receives no other 
benefit from all the goods it possesses; and as long as it derives no joy 
from them, we may say that it does not enjoy them any more than it 
would if it did not possess them at all. I add that the good is one which 
impressions in the brain represent as the soul’s own, so as not to confuse 


Part Two 361 


this joy, which is a passion, with the purely intellectual joy that arises in 
the soul through an action of the soul alone. The latter may be said to be 
a pleasant emotion which the soul arouses in itself whenever it enjoys a 
good which its understanding represents to it as its own. Of course, while 
the soul is joined to the body, this intellectual joy can scarcely fail to be 
accompanied by the joy which is a passion. For as soon as our intellect 
perceives that we possess some good, even one so different from anything 
belonging to the body as to be wholly unimaginable, the imagination 
cannot fail immediately to form some impression in the brain, from 
which there ensues the movement of the spirits which produces the 
passion of joy. 


92. The definition of sadness 

Sadness is an unpleasant listlessness which affects the soul when it suffers 
discomfort from an evil or deficiency which impressions in the brain 
represent to it as its own. There is also an intellectual sadness which, 
though not the passion, rarely fails to be accompanied by it. 


93. The causes of these two passions 

When intellectual joy or sadness arouses the corresponding passion, its 
cause is quite obvious. For we see from the definitions that joy results 
from the belief that we possess some good, and sadness from the belief 
that we have some evil or deficiency. But it often happens that we feel sad 
or joyful without being able to observe so distinctly the good or evil 
which causes this feeling. This happens when the good or evil forms its 
impression in the brain without the intervention of the soul, sometimes 
because it affects only the body and sometimes because, even though it 
affects the soul, the soul does not consider it as good or evil but views it 
under some other form whose impression is joined in the brain with that 
of the good or evil. 


94. How these passions are aroused by goods and evils which concern 
solely the body; and what titillation and pain consist in 
Thus, when we are in good health and things are calmer than usual, we 
feel in ourselves a cheerfulness which results not from any operation of 
the understanding but solely from impressions formed in the brain by the 
movement of the spirits. And we feel sad in the same way when our body 
is indisposed even though we do not know that it is. Indeed, titillation of 
the senses is followed so closely by joy, and pain by sadness, that most 
people make no distinction between the two. Nevertheless they differ so 
markedly that we may sometimes suffer pains with joy, and receive 
titillating sensations which displease us. But what makes joy ordinarily 


398 


399 


400 


401 


362 The Passions of the Soul 


follow titillation is the fact that what we call ‘titillation’ or ‘pleasurable 
sensation’ occurs when the objects of the senses produce some movement 
in the nerves which would be capable of harming them if they did not 
have enough strength to resist it or if the body was not in a healthy 
condition. This forms an impression in the brain which, being ordained 
by nature to bear witness to the body’s healthy condition and strength, 
represents this to the soul as a good which belongs to it in so far as it is 
united with the body; and so this impression produces joy in the soul. For 
almost the same reason we naturally take pleasure in feeling ourselves 
aroused to all sorts of passions — even to sadness and hatred — when these 
passions are caused merely by the strange happenings we see presented 
on the stage, or by other such things which, being incapable of harming 
us in any way, seem to affect our soul by titillating it. And pain usually 
produces sadness because the sensation we call ‘pain’ always results from 
an action so violent that it injures the nerves. This sensation, ordained by 
nature to indicate to the soul the bodily damage suffered from such an 
action, and the body’s feeble inability to withstand it, represents both 
as evils which are always unpleasant to the soul except when they cause 
some goods which the soul values more highly. 


95. How they may also be aroused by goods and evils which the soul 
does not notice even though they belong to it, such as the pleasure 
derived from taking risks or from recollecting past evils 

Young people often take pleasure in attempting difficult tasks and 
exposing themselves to great dangers even though they do not hope 
thereby to gain any profit or glory. This pleasure arises in the following 
way. The thought that the undertaking is difficult forms an impression in 
their brain which, when joined with the impression they could form if 
they were to think that it is a good thing to feel sufficiently courageous, 
happy, skilful, or strong to dare to take such risks, causes them to take 
pleasure in doing so. And the satisfaction which old people feel in 
recollecting the evils they have suffered results from their thinking that it 
is a good thing to have been able to survive in spite of them. 


96. The movements of the blood and the spirits which cause the five 
preceding passions 

The five passions I have begun to explain here are joined or opposed to 
one another to such an extent that it is easier to consider them all 
together than to treat each of them separately, as we treated wonder. 
Unlike the cause of wonder, which is located in the brain alone, their 
cause is located also in the heart, the spleen, the liver and all the other 
parts of the body, in so far as they help to produce the blood and hence 


Part Two 363 


the spirits. For, although all the veins conduct the blood to the heart, it 
sometimes happens that the blood in some veins is driven there with 
greater force than the blood in other veins; and it also happens that the 
openings through which the blood enters or leaves the heart are enlarged 
or contracted to a greater extent at one time than at another. 


97. The chief experiences which enable us to know these movements in 
the case of love 

In considering the various alterations which experience reveals in our 
body during the time our soul is agitated by different passions, I observe 
in the case of love that when it occurs on its own — that is, unaccompanied 
by any strong joy, desire, or sadness — the pulse has a regular beat, but is 
much fuller and stronger than normal; we feel a gentle heat in the chest; 
and the digestion of food takes place very quickly in the stomach. In this 
way this passion is conducive to good health. 


98. In hatred 

I observe in the case of hatred, on the other hand, that the pulse is 
irregular, weaker and often quicker; we feel chills mingled with a sort of 
sharp, piercing heat in the chest; and the stomach ceases to perform 
its function, being inclined to regurgitate and reject the food we have 
eaten, or at any rate to spoil it and turn it into bad humours. 


99. Injoy 

In joy, the pulse is regular and faster than normal, but not so strong or 
full as in the case of love; we feel a pleasant heat not only in the chest but 
also spreading into all the external parts of the body along with the blood 
which is seen to flow copiously to these parts; and yet we sometimes lose 
our appetite because our digestion is less active than usual. 


100. In sadness 

In sadness the pulse is weak and slow, and we feel as if our heart had 
tight bonds around it, and were frozen by icicles which transmit their 
cold to the rest of the body. But sometimes we still have a good appetite 
and feel our stomach continuing to do its duty, provided there is no 
hatred mixed with the sadness. 


101. In desire 

Lastly, I note this special feature of desire, that it agitates the heart more 
violently than any other passion, and supplies more spirits to the brain. 
Passing from there into the muscles, these spirits render all the senses 
more acute, and all the parts of the body more mobile. 


402 


403 


404 


405 


364 The Passions of the Soul 


102. The movement of the blood and the spirits in the case of love 

These observations, and many others that would take too long to report, 
have led me to conclude that when the understanding thinks of some 
object of love, this thought forms an impression in the brain which 
directs the animal spirits through the nerves of the sixth pair to the 
muscles surrounding the intestines and stomach, where they act in such a 
way that the alimentary juices (which are changing into new blood) flow 
rapidly to the heart without stopping in the liver.! Driven there with 
greater force than the blood from other parts of the body, these juices 
enter the heart in greater abundance and produce a stronger heat there 
because they are coarser than the blood which has already been rarefied 
many times as it passes again and again through the heart. As a result the 
spirits sent by the heart to the brain have parts which are coarser and 
more agitated than usual; and as they strengthen the impression formed 
by the first thought of the loved object, these spirits compel the soul to 
dwell upon this thought. This is what the passion of love consists in. 


103. In hatred 

In the case of hatred, on the other hand, at the first thought of the object 
that gives rise to aversion, the spirits in the brain are so directed to the 
muscles of the stomach and intestines that they constrict all the openings 
through which the alimentary juices normally flow, thus preventing these 
juices from mixing with the blood. This thought also directs the spirits to 
the little nerves of the spleen and the lower part of the liver (where the 
bile is collected) in such manner that the parts of blood which are 
normally returned to these organs issue from them and flow to the heart 
together with the blood which is in the branches of the vena cava. This 
causes the heat of the heart to be very uneven, in so far as the blood 
coming from the spleen is hardly heated and rarefied at all, whereas the 
blood coming from the lower part of the liver, where the gall is always 
located, boils up and expands very rapidly. In consequence the spirits 
going to the brain also have very unequal parts, and move very strangely. 
As a result they strengthen the ideas of hatred which are already 
imprinted there, and they dispose the soul to have thoughts which are full 
of acrimony and bitterness. 


104. Injoy 
In joy, it is not the nerves of the spleen, liver, stomach, or intestines that 
are active, so much as those throughout the rest of the body. The nerve 


1 Seven pairs of cranial nerves are recognized in Galenian physiology; the ‘sixth pair’ 
corresponds in modern physiology to the glossopharyngeal, vagus and spinal accessory 
nerves. 


Part Two 365 


located around the orifices of the heart is especially active: by opening 
and enlarging these orifices it enables the blood which other nerves drive 
through the veins to enter and leave the heart in larger quantities than 
usual. And because the blood then entering the heart has come into the 
veins from the arteries, and so has passed through the heart many times 
already, it expands very readily and produces spirits whose parts, being 
very equal and fine, are suited for the formation and strengthening of the 
impressions in the brain which give to the soul thoughts that are cheerful 
and peaceful. 


105. In sadness 

In sadness, by contrast, the openings in the heart are severely restricted 
by the small nerve which surrounds them, and the blood in the veins is 
not agitated at all, so that very little of it goes to the heart. At the same 
time, the passages through which the alimentary juices flow from the 
stomach and intestines to the liver remain open, so that the appetite does 
not diminish, except when hatred, which is often joined to sadness, closes 
these passages. 


106. In desire 

Finally, the passion of desire has this special characteristic: the volition to 
acquire some good or avoid some evil sends the spirits rapidly from the 
brain to all the parts of the body which may help to bring about this 
effect, and especially to the heart and the parts which supply most of its 
blood. Receiving a greater amount of blood than usual, the heart sends a 
greater quantity of spirits to the brain, both in order to maintain and 
strengthen the idea of the volition and to pass from there into all the 
sense organs and all the muscles that can be used for obtaining what is 
desired. 


107. The cause of these movements in the case of love 

I derive an explanation for all this from what I said previously, namely 
that our soul and our body are so linked that once we have joined some 
bodily action with a certain thought, the one does not occur afterwards 
without the other occurring too. We see this, for example, in those who 
have taken some medicine with great aversion when they are ill, and can- 
not afterwards eat or drink anything approaching it in taste without im- 
mediately feeling the same aversion; and similarly they cannot think of 
the aversion they have for medicines without the same taste returning in 
their thought. For it seems to me that when our soul began to be joined to 
our body, its first passions must have arisen on some occasion when the 
blood, or some other juice entering the heart, was a more suitable fuel 


406 


407 


408 


409 


366 The Passions of the Soul 


than usual for maintaining the heat which is the principle of life. This 
caused the soul to join itself willingly to that fuel, i.e. to love it; and at the 
same time the spirits flowed from the brain to the muscles capable of 
pressing or agitating the parts of the body from which the fuel had come 
to the heart, so as to make them send more of it. These parts were the 
stomach and the intestines, whose agitation increases the appetite, or else 
the liver and the lungs, which the muscles of the diaphragm can press. 
That is why this same movement of the spirits has ever since accompa- 
nied the passion of love. 


108. In hatred 

Sometimes, on the other hand, there came to the heart a juice of an alien 
nature, which was unsuitable for maintaining the heat, or even was 
capable of extinguishing it. This caused the spirits rising from the heart to 
the brain to produce the passion of hatred in the soul. At the same time 
these spirits went from the brain to nerves capable of driving blood from 
the spleen and the minute veins of the liver to the heart so as to prevent 
this harmful juice from entering it; and they also went to nerves capable 
of driving this juice back to the intestines and stomach, or capable 
sometimes of making the stomach regurgitate it. As a result, these same 
movements usually accompany the passion of hatred. You can see with 
the naked eye that the liver contains a number of rather wide veins or 
ducts through which the alimentary juices can pass from the portal vein 
into the vena cava, and then to the heart, without ever stopping in the 
liver. But you can also see countless other, smaller veins where the juice 
might stop. These always contain blood in reserve, as does the spleen, 
and since this blood is coarser than that in the other parts of the body, it 
is better able to serve as a fuel for the fire in the heart when the stomach 
and intestines fail to supply any. 


109. Injoy 

It has also sometimes happened at the beginning of our life that the blood 
contained in the veins was quite suitable for nourishing and maintaining 
the heat of the heart, and was so plentiful that the heart had no need for 
any other source of nourishment. This produced the passion of joy in the 
soul. At the same time it caused the orifices of the heart to be opened 
wider than usual; and it made the spirits flow abundantly from the brain 
not only into the nerves which serve to open these orifices but also 
generally into all the other nerves which drive the blood from the veins to 
the heart, thus preventing any fresh blood from coming into the heart 
from the liver, spleen, intestines and stomach. That is why these same 
movements accompany joy. 


Part Two 367 


110. In sadness 

Sometimes, on the other hand, it has happened that the body has lacked 
nourishment, and this lack must have made the soul feel its first sadness 
(at any rate the first which was not joined to hatred). It also caused the 
orifices of the heart to contract because they received only a little blood; 
and it caused a rather significant proportion of this blood to come from 
the spleen, since this is, so to speak, the ultimate reservoir of blood for 
the heart when it does not get enough from elsewhere. That explains why 
sadness is always accompanied by movements of the spirits and nerves 
which serve in this way to restrict the orifices of the heart and to direct 
blood to it from the spleen. 


111. In desire 

Lastly, when the soul was newly joined to the body, all its first desires 
must have been to accept things beneficial to it and to reject those 
harmful to it. It was to these same ends that the spirits began at that time 
to move all the muscles and sense organs in all the ways they can move 
them. That is the reason why now, when the soul desires anything, the 
whole body becomes more agile and ready to move than it normally is 
without any such desire. Moreover, when the body is in this condition, 
the desires of the soul are rendered stronger and keener. 


112. The external signs of these passions 

There is no need for me to pause to explain any further the differences in 
the pulse and all the other properties I have attributed to these passions, 
for I have said enough already to enable their causes to be understood. 
For each passion, however, I have noted solely what can be observed 
when it is the only one present, and what enables us to recognize the 
movements of the blood and spirits which produce it. I have yet to deal 
with the many external signs which usually accompany the passions — 
signs which are much better observed when several are mingled together, 
as they normally are, than when they are separated. The most important 
such signs are the expressions of the eyes and the face, changes in colour, 
trembling, listlessness, fainting, laughter, tears, groans and sighs. 


113. The expressions of the eyes and the face 

There is no passion which some particular expression of the eyes does not 
reveal. For some passions this is quite obvious: even the most stupid 
servants can tell from their master’s eye whether he is angry with them. 
But although it is easy to perceive such expressions of the eyes and to 
know what they signify, it is not easy to describe them. For each consists 
of many changes in the movement and shape of the eye, and these are so 


410 


4Il 


412 


413 


414 


368 The Passions of the Soul 


special and slight that we cannot perceive each of them separately, 
though we can easily observe the result of their conjunction. Almost the 
same can be said of the facial expressions which also accompany 
passions. For although more extensive than those of the eyes, they are 
still hard to discern. They differ so little that some people make almost 
the same face when they weep as others do when they laugh. Of course, 
some facial expressions are quite noticeable, such as wrinkles in the 
forehead in anger and certain movements of the nose and lips in 
indignation and derision; but these seem not so much natural as 
voluntary. And in general the soul is able to change facial expressions, as 
well as expressions of the eyes, by vividly feigning a passion which is 
contrary to one it wishes to conceal. Thus we may use such expressions 
to hide our passions as well as to reveal them. 


114. Changes in colour 

We cannot so easily prevent ourselves from blushing or growing pale 
when some passion disposes us to do so. For these changes do not depend 
on the nerves and muscles as do the preceding ones: they proceed more 
immediately from the heart, which may be called the source of the 
passions in so far as it prepares the blood and the spirits to produce them. 
It is certain that the colour of the face comes solely from the blood which, 
flowing continually from the heart through the arteries into the veins and 
then back into the heart, colours the face more or less, depending on 
whether it fills the small veins located near its surface to a greater or 
lesser extent. 


115. How joy causes blushing 

Thus joy renders the colour brighter and rosier because it opens the 
valves of the heart and so causes the blood to flow more quickly in all the 
veins. As the blood becomes warmer and thinner it fills out all the parts 
of the face somewhat, thus making it look more cheerful and happier. 


116. How sadness causes pallor 

Sadness, on the other hand, constricts the orifices of the heart, causing 
the blood to flow more slowly in the veins and to become colder and 
thicker. Needing to occupy less space, the blood then withdraws into the 
largest veins, which are the nearest to the heart, leaving the more remote 
veins, such as those in the face; and since these are particularly 
conspicuous, the face is caused to appear pale and sunken. This happens 
chiefly when the sadness is great, or when it comes on suddenly, as in 
terror, when surprise amplifies the action which grips the heart. 


Part Two 369 


117. Why we often blush when we are sad 

But it often happens that we do not become pale when we are sad, and on 
the contrary we become flushed. This must be attributed to the other 
passions which are joined to sadness, namely love or desire, and 
sometimes also hatred. For when these passions heat or agitate the blood 
coming from the liver, intestines and other internal parts of the body, 
they drive it to the heart, and then through the great artery to the veins in 
the face. And the sadness which more or less closes the orifices of the 
heart cannot stop this blood except when it is quite profound. But even if it 
is only moderate, this sadness easily prevents the blood which has entered 
the veins of the face from descending to the heart, so long as love, desire, 
or hatred is driving other blood there from the internal parts. That is why 
the blood trapped in the face makes it red — indeed, redder than when we 
are joyful, since the colour of blood is all the more conspicuous when it 
flows less rapidly, and also because more blood can collect in the veins of 
the face when the orifices of the heart are opened less widely. We see this 
chiefly in shame, which is made up of self-love and an urgent desire to 
avoid present disgrace (which makes the blood come from the internal 
parts to the heart and then through the arteries to the face), together with 
a moderate sadness (which prevents this blood from returning to the 
heart). The same thing usually seems to happen also when we weep; 
for, as I shall explain shortly, tears are caused for the most part by 
a combination of love and sadness. And it is seen in anger, when a 
sudden desire for vengeance is often mingled with love, hatred and 
sadness. 


118. Trembling 

There are two distinct causes of trembling. One is that sometimes too few 
of the spirits in the brain enter into the nerves to be able to close the little 
passages of the muscles in just the way that, according to the account 
given in article 11, they must be closed in order to cause the movements 
of the limbs; and the other is that sometimes too many of the spirits enter 
into the nerves to be able to do this. The first cause is seen in sadness and 
fear, and also when we tremble with cold. For these passions, like the 
coldness of the air, may cause the blood to thicken so much that it does 
not supply enough spirits to the brain to permit any to be sent to the 
nerves. The other cause is often seen in those who keenly desire 
something, or are strongly moved by anger, and also in those who are 
drunk. For these two passions, as well as wine, sometimes make so many 
spirits go to the brain that they cannot be directed from there in an 
orderly way into the muscles. 


415 


416 


417 


418 


370 The Passions of the Soul 


119. Listlessness 

Listlessness is an inclination felt in all the limbs to relax and remain 
motionless. As in the case of trembling, but in a different way, it results 
from too few spirits entering into the nerves. For the cause of trembling is 
that there are not enough spirits in the brain to carry out the directions of 
the gland when it drives them to some muscle; whereas listlessness results 
from the gland’s not directing the spirits to some muscles rather than 
others. 


120. How it is caused by love and by desire 

The passion that most commonly brings about this effect is love, 
combined with desire, for a thing whose acquisition is not imagined to be 
possible at the present time. For love makes the soul so engrossed in 
thinking about the loved object that it uses all the spirits in the brain in 
representing the image of this object, and it stops all the movements of 
the gland which do not serve this purpose. And regarding desire, it must 
be observed that the property of making the body more mobile, which I 
ascribed to it earlier,! applies to it only when we imagine the desired 
object to be something which we are able at that time to take steps 
towards acquiring. For if we imagine, on the contrary, that it is 
impossible to do anything that might serve this end, all the agitation due 
to the desire remains in the brain without passing into the nerves; and, 
serving only to strengthen the idea of the desired object, this agitation 
leaves the rest of the body in a listless state. 


121. It may also be caused by other passions 

It is true that hatred, sadness and even joy may also cause some 
listlessness when it is very violent, because it makes the soul wholly 
engrossed in thinking about its object; this happens chiefly when these 
passions are combined with the desire for something which we cannot do 
anything to acquire at the present time. But listlessness is encountered 
much more in love than in all the other passions. For we pause much 
more to think about objects to which we join ourselves willingly than to 
think about objects from which we separate ourselves, or about any 
other objects; and listlessness does not depend on surprise but requires 
some time for its formation. 


122. Fainting 
Fainting is not far removed from dying, for we die when the fire in our 


heart is completely extinguished, and we merely fall into a faint when it is 


1 Art. 101, p. 363 above. 


Part Two 371 


smothered in such a way that there remain some traces of heat which 
may afterwards rekindle it. There are many bodily indispositions which 
may cause us to fall into a faint; but among the passions it is only 
extreme joy that we observe to have the power to do this. Here is the way 
in which I believe it causes this effect. It opens the orifices of the heart 
unusually wide, so that the blood from the veins enters the heart so 
suddenly and so copiously that it cannot be rarefied by the heat in the 
heart quickly enough to raise all the little membranes which close the 
entrances to these veins. In this way the blood smothers the fire which it 
usually maintains when it enters the heart in moderate amounts. 


123. Why sadness does not cause us to faint 

It seems that a great sadness which comes upon us unexpectedly ought to 
grip the orifices of the heart so tightly as to extinguish the fire; yet we do 
not observe this to happen, or if it happens it does so very rarely. The 
reason for this, I believe, is that there can hardly ever be insufficient blood 
in the heart to maintain the heat there when its orifices are almost closed. 


124. Laughter 

Laughter results when the blood coming from the right-hand cavity of 
the heart through the arterial vein causes the lungs to swell up suddenly 
and repeatedly, forcing the air they contain to rush out through the 
windpipe, where it forms an inarticulate, explosive sound. As the air is 
expelled, the lungs are swollen so much that they push against all the 
muscles of the diaphragm, chest and throat, thus causing movement in 
the facial muscles with which these organs are connected. And it is just 
this facial expression, together with the inarticulate and explosive sound, 
that we call ‘laughter’. 


125. Why laughter does not accompany the greatest joys 

Now although laughter seems to be one of the chief signs of joy, yet joy 
cannot cause laughter except when it is moderate and mixed with an 
element of wonder or hatred. For we find by experience that when we are 
unusually joyful, the subject of this joy never makes us burst into 
laughter; and indeed, we are never so ready to laugh as when we are sad. 
The reason for this is that in great joy the lungs are always so full that 
they cannot be swollen any more by further surges of blood. 


126. The principal causes of laughter 

I can see only two things that might cause the lungs to swell up suddenly 
in this way. The first is the surprise of wonder, which may be combined 
with joy so as to open the orifices of the heart so rapidly that a great 


419 


420 


421 


422 


372 The Passions of the Soul 


quantity of blood suddenly enters its right-hand side from the vena cava, 
becomes rarefied there, and passes through the arterial vein to swell up 
the lungs. The other is the admixture of some liquid which increases the 
rarefaction of the blood. I cannot discover any such liquid other than the 
most fluid part of that which comes from the spleen. Driven to the heart 
by some slight emotion of hatred (helped by the surprise of wonder), this 
part of the blood mingles there with the blood coming from other regions 
of the body (which joy drives into the heart in abundance) and may cause 
this blood to expand much more than usual. We see the same thing in a 
number of other liquids, which suddenly swell up when we throw a little 
vinegar into a vessel containing them over a fire. For the most fluid part 
of the blood coming from the spleen has a nature similar to that of 
vinegar. Experience also reveals that in every situation which may cause 
such laughter to burst forth from the lungs, there is always some slight 
occasion for hatred, or at least for wonder. And those with an unhealthy 
spleen are apt not only to be sadder than others, but also at times to be 
more cheerful and more disposed to laughter, inasmuch as the spleen 
sends two kinds of blood to the heart, one very thick and coarse, which 
causes sadness, and the other fluid and thin, which causes joy. And we 
often feel ourselves naturally inclined to be sad after we have laughed a 
lot, because the more fluid part of the blood in the spleen has been 
exhausted and the other, coarser part follows it to the heart. 


127. What causes laughter in the case of indignation 

As for the laughter which sometimes accompanies indignation, it is 
usually artificial and feigned. But when it is natural, it seems to result 
from the joy we feel in seeing that we cannot be harmed by the evil at 
which we are indignant, together with our surprise at the novelty of the 
evil or at our unexpected encounter with it. So it is that joy, hatred and 
wonder contribute to indignation. Yet I am willing to believe that it may 
also be produced without any joy, by the movement of aversion alone, 
which sends blood from the spleen to the heart, where the blood is 
rarefied and then driven to the lungs, which it readily causes to swell 
when it finds them almost empty. In general, whatever may suddenly 
make the lungs swell up in this manner causes the external action of 
laughter, except when sadness changes it into the groans and cries which 
accompany tears. Regarding this matter, Vives writes that when he had 
gone without eating for a long time, the first pieces of food that he put in 
his mouth caused him to laugh.! This could result from the fact that his 
lungs, emptied of blood by lack of nourishment, were rapidly swollen by 


1 J. L. Vives, De Anima et Vita (1538), ch. 3. Juan Luis Vives (1493-1540) was a humanist 
scholar celebrated as an educational theorist and a critic of scholastic logic. 


Part Two 373 


the first juice which passed from his stomach to his heart, and which the 
mere imagination of eating could direct there even before the arrival of 
the juice of the food he was eating. 


128. The origin of tears 

As laughter is never caused by the greatest joys, so tears do not result 
from an extreme sadness, but only from a sadness that is moderate and 
accompanied or followed by some feeling of love or joy. To under- 
stand their origin properly, we must observe that although lots of 
vapours continually issue from all parts of our body, there are none from 
which so many issue as from the eyes. This is caused by the size of the 
optic nerves and the multitude of little arteries by which the vapours get 
there. Just as sweat is composed merely of vapours which are converted 
into water on the surface of the parts from which they issue, so tears are 
formed from the vapours that issue from our eyes. 


129. How the vapours are changed into water 

In the Meteorology, to explain how the vapours of the air are transformed 
into rain, I wrote that this results from their being less agitated or more 
abundant than usual.! Likewise I believe that when the vapours issuing 
from the body are much less agitated than usual, even if they are not so 
abundant, they are still transformed into water; this causes the cold 
sweats which sometimes result from weakness when we are ill. And | 
believe that the bodily vapours are also transformed into water when 
they are much more abundant, provided they are not at the same time 
more agitated. This causes the sweat which occurs when we take 
exercise. But the eyes do not weep then, because during bodily exercise 
the greatest part of the spirits go to the muscles used in moving the body, 
and less of them go through the optic nerve to the eyes. It is one and the 
same matter that forms blood (when in the veins or the arteries), the 
spirits (when in the brain, nerves, or muscles), vapours (when it issues 
forth in the form of air), and finally sweat or tears (when it thickens into 
water on the surfaces of the body or the eyes). 


130. How something that causes pain in the eye makes it weep 

I can observe only two causes that make the vapours issuing from the 
eyes change into tears. The first is a change in the shape of the pores 
through which they pass. By whatever accident this may happen, it 
retards the movement of these vapours and changes their order, and so 
may cause them to be transformed into water. Thus a speck in our eye is 


1 Meteorology, Disc. 2 (AT vi 239ff). 


423 


424 


425 


426 


374 The Passions of the Soul 


enough to draw forth tears. For in producing pain there it changes the 
arrangement of the eye’s pores so that some of them become narrower, 
and the tiny parts of the vapours pass through them less quickly. Hence, 
whereas previously they issued forth equidistant from each other, and so 
remained separated, they now come together because the order of the 
pores is disturbed. In this way the parts of the vapours are joined 
together, and so transformed into tears. 


131. How we weep from sadness 

The other cause of tears is sadness followed by love or joy, or in general 
by some cause which makes the heart drive a lot of blood through the 
arteries. Sadness is required for this, because in chilling all the blood 
again it constricts the pores of the eyes. But to the extent that it constricts 
them, it also decreases the quantity of the vapours which can pass 
through them, and for this reason sadness is not sufficient to produce 
tears unless the quantity of these vapours is increased at the same time by 
some other cause. And there is nothing which increases it more than the 
blood which is sent to the heart in the passion of love. We see, too, that 
those who are sad do not shed tears continually, but only intermittently, 
when they reflect anew upon the objects of their affection. 


132. The groans which accompany tears 

The lungs are also sometimes suddenly swollen by the abundance of the 
blood which enters them and expels the air they contained. As this air 
goes out through the windpipe it produces the groans and cries which 
customarily accompany tears. These cries are usually shriller than those 
accompanying laughter, although they are produced in almost the same 
way. The reason for this is that the nerves that enlarge or constrict the 
vocal organs, making the voice louder or shriller, are joined with those 
that open the orifices of the heart when we are joyful and constrict them 
when we are sad, and so they make the vocal organs become wider or 
narrower at the same time. 


133. Why children and old people weep readily 

Children and old people are more inclined to weep than the middle-aged, 
but for different reasons. Old people often weep from affection and joy. 
For when these two passions are combined together they send a lot of 
blood to the heart, and many vapours from there to the eyes. And the 
agitation of these vapours is reduced to such an extent by the coldness of 
their nature that the vapours are easily transformed into tears even 
without any preceding sadness. And if some old people also weep very 
readily from vexation, it is not so much the temperament of their body as 


Part Two 375 


of their mind which so disposes them. This happens only to those who 
are so weak that they let themselves be utterly overcome by trivial 
matters involving pain, fear, or pity. The same thing happens with 
children, who hardly ever weep from joy, but much more often from 
sadness, even when it is not accompanied by love. For children always 
have enough blood to produce a lot of vapours; and these turn into tears 
when their movement is retarded by the sadness. 


134. Why some children grow pale instead of weeping 

Yet there are some children who, instead of weeping, grow pale when 
they are angry. This may indicate unusual discernment and courage on 
their part, namely when it results from their considering the extent of some 
evil and preparing themselves to resist it strongly, in the same fashion as 
those who are older. But more commonly it indicates a bad nature, 
namely when it results from their being inclined to hatred or fear. For 
these are passions which decrease the matter of which tears are formed. 
We observe, on the other hand, that children who weep very readily are 
inclined to love and to pity. 


135. Sighs 

The cause of sighs is very different from that of tears, even though they 
are similar in presupposing sadness. For whereas we are moved to weep 
when our lungs are full of blood, we are moved to sigh when they are 
almost empty and some imagined hope or joy opens the orifice of the 
venous artery which sadness had constricted. Then the little blood 
remaining in the lungs flows down suddenly into the left-hand side of the 
heart through this artery, where it is driven by the desire to attain this 
joy. At the same time this desire agitates all the muscles of the diaphragm 
and chest, so that air comes rapidly through the mouth into the lungs to 
fill the place vacated by the blood. And that is what we call ‘sighing’. 


136. How the passions which are peculiar to certain persons produce 
their effects 

For the rest, so as to put in a few words all the points that might be added 
regarding the different effects or different causes of the passions, I shall 
content myself with repeating the principle which underlies everything | 
have written about them — namely, that our soul and body are so linked 
that once we have joined some bodily action with a certain thought, the 
one does not occur thereafter without the other occurring too; but we do 
not always join the same actions to the same thoughts. This principle 
alone can account for any particular phenomenon involving the passions, 
whether in oneself or iniothers, which has not been explained here. For 


427 


428 


429 


430 


431 


376 The Passions of the Soul 


example, the strange aversions of certain people that make them unable 
to bear the smell of roses, the presence of a cat, or the like, can readily be 
recognized as resulting simply from their having been greatly upset by 
some such object in the early years of their life. Or it may even result 
from their having been affected by the feelings their mother had when she 
was upset by such an object while pregnant; for there certainly is a 
connection between all the movements of a mother and those of a child in 
her womb, so that anything adverse to the one is harmful to the other. 
And the smell of roses may have caused severe headache in a child when 
he was still in the cradle, or a cat may have terrified him without anyone 
noticing and without any memory of it remaining afterwards; and yet the 
idea of the aversion he then felt for the roses or for the cat will remain 
imprinted on his brain till the end of his life. 


137. The function of the five passions explained here, in so far as they 
relate to the body 

Having given definitions of love, hatred, desire, joy and sadness, and 
dealt with all the bodily movements which cause or accompany them, we 
have only to consider their function. Regarding this, it must be observed 
that they are all ordained by nature to relate to the body, and to belong to 
the soul only in so far as it is joined with the body. Hence, their natural 
function is to move the soul to consent and contribute to actions which 
may serve to preserve the body or render it in some way more perfect. 
From this point of view, sadness and joy are the two passions that have 
primary application. For it is only through a feeling of pain that the soul 
is immediately advised about things that harm the body: this feeling 
produces in the soul first the passion of sadness, then hatred of what 
causes the pain, and finally the desire to get rid of it. Similarly the soul is 
immediately advised about things useful to the body only through some 
sort of titillation, which first produces joy within it, then gives rise to love 
of what we believe to be its cause, and finally brings about the desire to 
acquire something that can enable us to continue in this joy, or else to 
have a similar joy again later on. This shows that these five passions are 
all very useful with respect to the body. It shows too that sadness is in 
some way primary and more necessary than joy, and hatred more 
necessary than love; for it is more important to reject things which are 
harmful and potentially destructive than to acquire those which add 
some perfection which we can subsist without. 


138. Their faults and the means of correcting them 
This function of the passions is the most natural that they can have. For 
all the animals devoid of reason conduct their lives simply through bodily 


Part Two 377 


movements similar to those which, in our case, usually follow upon the 
passions which move our soul to consent to such movements. Neverthe- 
less it is not always good for the passions to function in this way, in so far 
as there are many things harmful to the body which cause no sadness 
initially (or which even produce joy), and in so far as other things are 
useful to the body, although at first they are disagreeable. Furthermore, 
the passions almost always cause the goods they represent, as well as the 
evils, to appear much greater and more important than they are, thus 
moving us to pursue the former and flee from the latter with more ardour 
and zeal than is appropriate. Likewise, we see that animals are often 
deceived by lures, and in seeking to avoid small evils they throw 
themselves into greater evils. That is why we must use experience and 
reason in order to distinguish good from evil and know their true value, so 
as not to take the one for the other or rush into anything immoderately. 


139. The function of these passions in so far as they belong to the soul; 
firstly, of love 

This would be sufficient if we had in us only a body, or if the body were 
our better part. But as it is only the lesser part, we should consider the 
passions chiefly in so far as they belong to the soul. In this regard, love 
and hatred result from knowledge and precede joy and sadness, except 
when the latter stands in place of the knowledge of which they are 
species.! And when this knowledge is true — that is, when the things it 
brings us to love are truly good and those it brings us to hate are truly 
bad — love is incomparably better than hatred: it can never be too great, 
and it never fails to produce joy. I say that this love is extremely good 
because by joining real goods to us it makes us to that extent more 
perfect. I say also that it cannot be too great, for all that the most 
excessive love can do is to join us so perfectly to these goods that the love 
we have especially for ourselves must apply to them as well as to us; and 
this, I believe, can never be bad. And it is necessarily followed by joy, 
because it represents to us what we love as a good belonging to us. 


140. Hatred 

Hatred, on the other hand, cannot be so mild as to be harmless, and it is 
never devoid of sadness. I say it cannot be too mild because, however 
much the hatred of an evil moves us to an action, we could always be 
moved to it even more effectively by love of the contrary good — at least 
when the good and evil are adequately known. For I acknowledge that 


1 Cf. art. 79, p. 356 above. Love and hatred result from judgements concerning good and 
evil, and when these judgements constitute knowledge of good or evil, they are 
accompanied by joy or sadness. 


432 


433 


434 


435 


378 The Passions of the Soul 


hatred of the evil which is manifested solely by pain is necessary where 
the body is concerned; but I am speaking here only about the hatred 
which results from a clearer knowledge, which I refer to the soul alone. 
I say also that this hatred is never without sadness because evil, being 
merely a privation, cannot be conceived without some real subject in 
which it exists; and there is nothing real which does not have some 
goodness in it. Hence the hatred which takes us away from some evil 
likewise takes us away from the good to which it is joined, and the 
privation of this good, being represented to our soul as a fault belonging 
to it, arouses sadness in it. For example, the hatred which takes us away 
from someone’s evil habits likewise takes us away from his company; 
and we might otherwise find in the latter some good which we should be 
sorry to be deprived of. So too, in all other cases of hatred we can see 
some reason for sadness. 


141. Desire, joy and sadness 

As for desire, it is obvious that when it proceeds from true knowledge it 
cannot be bad, provided it is not excessive and that it is governed by 
this knowledge. It is obvious too that joy cannot fail to be good, nor 
sadness bad, with respect to the soul. For the discomfort which the soul 
receives from evil consists wholly in the latter, and the enjoyment of the 
good belonging to the soul consists wholly in the former. Thus, if we had 
no body, I venture to say we could not go too far in abandoning ourselves 
to love and joy, or in avoiding hatred and sadness. But the bodily 
movements accompanying these passions may all be injurious to health 
when they are very violent; on the other hand, they may be beneficial to it 
when they are only moderate. 


142. Joy and love, compared with sadness and hatred 

Moreover, since hatred and sadness should be rejected by the soul, even 
when they proceed from true knowledge, there is all the more reason to 
reject them when they result from some false opinion. But it may be 
questioned whether love and joy are good when they rest in this way on a 
bad foundation. It seems to me that if we consider them just as they are in 
themselves with respect to the soul, we may say that although joy is less 
secure, and love less beneficial, than when they have a better foundation, 
they are still preferable to any sadness or hatred resting on an equally bad 
foundation. Thus, in the affairs of everyday life, where we cannot avoid 
the risk of being mistaken, it is always much better for us to incline 
towards the passions which tend to the good than for us to incline 
towards those which relate to evil (even if we do so only in order to avoid 
it); and even a false joy is often more valuable than a sadness whose cause 
is true. But I dare not say the same about love in relation to hatred. For 


Part Two 379 


when hatred is justified it simply takes us away from a subject containing 
an evil from which it is good to be separated; whereas a love which is 
unjustified joins us to things which may be harmful, or at least which 
deserve less consideration than we give them, and this demeans and 
debases us. 


143. The same passions in so far as they relate to desire 

We must take care to observe that what I have just said about these four 
passions holds only when they are considered exactly in themselves, and 
they do not lead us to perform any action. For in so far as they govern 
our behaviour by producing desire in us, it is certain that all those having 
a false cause may be harmful, while by contrast all having a just cause 
may be useful. And even when they rest on equally bad foundations, joy 
is usually more harmful than sadness, because the latter engenders 
restraint and anxiety, and so disposes us in a certain way to prudence, 
whereas the former make those who abandon themselves to it rash and 
imprudent. 


144. Desires whose attainment depends only on us 

But because these passions cannot lead us to perform any action except 
by means of the desire they produce, it is this desire which we should take 
particular care to control; and here lies the chief utility of morality. As I 
have just said, desire is always good when it conforms to true knowledge; 
likewise it cannot fail to be bad when based on some error. And it seems 
to me that the error we commit most commonly in respect of desires is 
failure to distinguish adequately the things which depend wholly on us 
from those which do not depend on us at all. Regarding those which 
depend only on us — that is, on our free will — our knowledge of their 
goodness ensures that we cannot desire them with too much ardour, 
since the pursuit of virtue consists in doing the good things that depend 
on us, and it is certain that we cannot have too ardent a desire for virtue. 
Moreover, what we desire in this way cannot fail to have a happy 
outcome for us, since it depends on us alone, and so we always receive 
from it all the satisfaction we expected from it. But the mistake we 
ordinarily make in this regard is never that we desire too much; it is 
rather that we desire too little. The supreme remedy against this mistake 
is to free our mind as much as possible from all kinds of other less useful 
desires, and then to try to know very clearly, and to consider with 
attention, the goodness of that which is to be desired. 


145. Those desires which depend solely on other causes; and what 
Fortune ts 

Regarding the things which do not depend on us in any way, we must 

never desire them with passion, however good they may be. This holds 


436 


437 


438 


439 


380 The Passions of the Soul 


not only because they may not happen, thus making us the more irritated 
the more strongly we wished for them, but chiefly because in occupying 
our thoughts they prevent our forming a liking for other things whose 
acquisition depends on us. There are two general remedies for such vain 
desires. The first is generosity, about which I shall speak later. The 
second is frequent reflection upon divine Providence: we should reflect 
upon the fact that nothing can possibly happen other than as Providence 
has determined from all eternity. Providence is, so to speak, a fate or 
immutable necessity, which we must set against Fortune in order to 
expose the latter as a chimera which arises solely from an error of our 
intellect. For we can desire only what we consider in some way to 
be possible; and things which do not depend on us can be considered 
possible only in so far as they are thought to depend on Fortune — that is 
to say, in so far as we judge that they may happen and that similar things 
have happened at other times. But this opinion is based solely on our not 
knowing all the causes which contribute to each effect. For when a thing 
we considered to depend on Fortune does not happen, this indicates that 
one of the causes necessary for its production was absent, and conse- 
quently that it was absolutely impossible and that no similar thing has 
ever happened, i.e. nothing for the production of which a similar cause 
was also absent. Had we not been ignorant of this beforehand, we should 
never have considered it possible and consequently we should never have 
desired it. 


146. Those desires which depend on us and on others 

We must, then, utterly reject the common opinion that there is a Fortune 
outside us which causes things to happen or not to happen, just as it 
pleases. And we must recognize that everything is guided by divine 
Providence, whose eternal decree is infallible and immutable to such an 
extent that, except for matters it has determined to be dependent on our 
free will, we must consider everything that affects us to occur of necessity 
and as it were by fate, so that it would be wrong for us to desire things to 
happen in any other way. But most of our desires extend to matters 
which do not depend wholly on us or wholly on others, and we must 
therefore take care to pick out just what depends only on us, so as to limit 
our desire to that alone. As for the rest, although we must consider their 
outcome to be wholly fated and immutable, so as to prevent our desire 
from occupying itself with them, yet we must not fail to consider the 
reasons which make them more or less predictable, so as to use these 
reasons in governing our actions. Thus, for example, suppose we have 
business in some place to which we might travel by two different routes, 
one usually much safer than the other. And suppose Providence decrees 


Part Two 381 


that if we go by the route we regard as safer we shall not avoid being 
robbed, whereas we may travel by the other route without any danger. 
Nevertheless, we should not be indifferent as to which one we choose, or 
rely upon the immutable fatality of this decree. Reason insists that we 
choose the route which is usually the safer, and our desire in this case 
must be fulfilled when we have followed this route, whatever evil may 
befall us; for, since any such evil was inevitable from our point of view, 
we had no reason to wish to be exempt from it: we had reason only to do 
the best that our intellect was able to recognize, as I am supposing that 
we did. And it is certain that when we apply ourselves to distinguish 
Fatality from Fortune in this way, we easily acquire the habit of 
governing our desires so that their fulfillment depends only on us, making 
it possible for them always to give us complete satisfaction. 


147. The internal emotions of the soul 

Here I shall merely add one further consideration which, it seems to me, 
serves very well to prevent us from suffering any discomfort from the 
passions. It is that our well-being depends principally on internal 
emotions which are produced in the soul only by the soul itself. In this 
respect they differ from its passions, which always depend on some 
movement of the spirits. Although these emotions of the soul are often 
joined with the passions which are similar to them, they frequently occur 
with others, and they may even originate in those to which they are 
opposed. For example, when a husband mourns his dead wife, it 
sometimes happens that he would be sorry to see her brought to life 
again. It may be that his heart is torn by the sadness aroused in him by 
the funeral display and by the absence of a person to whose company he 
was accustomed. And it may be that some remnants of love or of pity 
occur in his imagination and draw genuine tears from his eyes. Neverthe- 
less he feels at the same time a secret joy in his innermost soul, and the 
emotion of this joy has such power that the concomitant sadness and 
tears can do nothing to diminish its force. Again, when we read of 
strange adventures in a book, or see them acted out on the stage, this 
sometimes arouses sadness in us, sometimes joy, or love, or hatred, and 
generally any of the passions, depending on the diversity of the objects 
which are presented to our imagination. But we also have pleasure in 
feeling them aroused in us, and this pleasure is an intellectual joy which 
may as readily originate in sadness as in any of the other passions. 


148. The exercise of virtue is a supreme remedy against the passions 
Now these internal emotions affect us more intimately, and consequently 
have much more power over us than the passions which occur with them 


440 


441 


442 


382 The Passions of the Soul 


but are distinct from them. To this extent it is certain that, provided our 
soul always has the means of happiness within itself, all the troubles 
coming from elsewhere are powerless to harm it. Such troubles will serve 
rather to increase its joy; for on seeing that it cannot be harmed by them, 
it becomes aware of its perfection. And in order that our soul should have 
the means of happiness, it needs only to pursue virtue diligently. For if 
anyone lives in such a way that his conscience cannot reproach him for 
ever failing to do something he judges to be the best (which is what I here 
call ‘pursuing virtue’), he will receive from this a satisfaction which has 
such power to make him happy that the most violent assaults of the 
passions will never have sufficient power to disturb the tranquillity of his 
soul. 


PART THREE 
Specific Passions 


149. Esteem and contempt 

After having explained the six primitive passions — which are, as it were, 
the genera of which all the others are species — | shall make brief 
observations about the special features of each of the others, keeping the 
same order as in the foregoing enumeration. The first two are esteem and 
contempt. Usually the terms ‘esteem’ and ‘contempt’ signify only our 
dispassionate opinions concerning a thing’s value. But such opinions 
often give rise to passions having no particular name, and it seems to me 
that the terms may be applied to these passions. Esteem, regarded as a 
passion, is the soul’s inclination to represent to itself the value of the 
object of its esteem, this inclination being caused by a special movement 
of the spirits which are so directed in the brain that they strengthen the 
impressions having this effect. The passion of contempt, on the other 
hand, is the soul’s inclination to consider the baseness or insignificance of 
the object of its contempt, and is caused by a movement of the spirits 
which strengthens the idea of this insignificance. 


150. These two passions are merely species of wonder 

So these two passions are merely species of wonder. For when we do not 
wonder at the greatness or the insignificance of an object, making no 
more of it and no less of it than reason deems we ought, then our esteem 
or contempt for it is dispassionate. And although esteem is often aroused 
in us by love, and contempt by hatred, this does not hold generally: it 
results simply from our being more or less inclined to consider the 
greatness or the insignificance of an object because we have more or less 
affection for it. 


151. We may have esteem or contempt for ourselves 

In general, these two passions may relate to all sorts of objects. But they 
are chiefly noteworthy when we refer them to ourselves, i.e. when it is 
our own merit for which we have esteem or contempt. The movement of 


383 


443 


444 


445 


446 


447 


384 The Passions of the Soul 


the spirits which causes them in this case is so manifest that it changes 
even the appearance, gestures, gait and, generally, all the actions of those 
who conceive an unusually better or worse opinion of themselves. 


152. For what reasons we may have esteem for ourselves 

Since one of the principal parts of wisdom is to know in what manner 
and for what reason anyone ought to have esteem or contempt for 
himself, I shall try to give my views on this question. I see only one thing 
in us which could give us good reason for esteeming ourselves, namely, 
the exercise of our free will and the control we have over our volitions. 
For we can reasonably be praised or blamed only for actions that depend 
upon this free will. It renders us in a certain way like God by making 
us masters of ourselves, provided we do not lose the rights it gives us 
through timidity. 


153. What generosity consists in 

Thus I believe that true generosity, which causes a person’s self-esteem to 
be as great as it may legitimately be, has only two components. The first 
consists in his knowing that nothing truly belongs to him but this free- 
dom to dispose his volitions, and that he ought to be praised or blamed for 
no other reason than his using this freedom well or badly. The second 
consists in his feeling within himself a firm and constant resolution to use 
it well — that is, never to lack the will to undertake and carry out 
whatever he judges to be best. To do that is to pursue virtue in a perfect 
manner. 


154. Generosity prevents us from having contempt for others 

Those who possess this knowledge and this feeling about themselves 
readily come to believe that any other person can have the same 
knowledge and feeling about himself, because this involves nothing 
which depends on someone else. That is why such people never have 
contempt for anyone. Although they often see that others do wrong in 
ways that show up their weakness, they are nevertheless more inclined to 
excuse than to blame them and to regard such wrong-doing as due rather 
to lack of knowledge than to lack of a virtuous will. Just as they do not 
consider themselves much inferior to those who have greater wealth or 
honour, or even to those who have more intelligence, knowledge or 
beauty, or generally to those who surpass them in some other perfections, 
equally they do not have much more esteem for themselves than for those 
whom they surpass. For all these things seem to them to be very 
unimportant, by contrast with the virtuous will for which alone they 
esteem themselves, and which they suppose also to be present, or at least 
capable of being present, in every other person. 


Part Three 385 


155. What humility as a virtue consists in 

Thus the most generous people are usually also the most humble. We 
have humility as a virtue when, as a result of reflecting on the infirmity of 
our nature and on the wrongs we may previously have done, or are 
capable of doing (wrongs which are no less serious than those which 
others may do), we do not prefer ourselves to anyone else and we think 
that since others have free will just as much as we do, they may use it just 
as well as we use ours. 


156. The properties of generosity; and how generosity serves as a 
remedy against all the disorders of the passions 

Those who are generous in this way are naturally led to do great deeds, 
and at the same time not to undertake anything of which they do not feel 
themselves capable. And because they esteem nothing more highly than 
doing good to others and disregarding their own self-interest, they are 
always perfectly courteous, gracious and obliging to everyone. Moreover 
they have complete command over their passions. In particular, they 
have mastery over their desires, and over jealousy and envy, because 
everything they think sufficiently valuable to be worth pursuing is such 
that its acquisition depends solely on themselves; over hatred of other 
people, because they have esteem for everyone; over fear, because of the 
self-assurance which confidence in their own virtue gives them; and 
finally over anger, because they have very little esteem for everything that 
depends on others, and so they never give their enemies any advantage by 
acknowledging that they are injured by them. 


157. Vanity 

All who conceive a good opinion of themselves for any other reason, 
whatever it might be, do not possess true generosity, but only a vanity 
which is always a vice, and is all the more so the less justification such 
people have for esteeming themselves highly. They have the least 
justification when they are vain for no reason at all — that is, not because 
they think they have any merit for which they ought to be valued, but 
simply because they do not regard merit as important: imagining pride to 
‘be nothing but self-glorification, they believe that those who attribute the 
most merit to themselves actually have the most merit. This vice is so 
unreasonable and absurd that I would find it difficult to believe there are 
men who allow themselves to fall into it, if no one was ever praised 
unjustly. But flattery is so common everywhere that there is no man 
whose faults are so great that he never finds himself esteemed for things 
which are not praiseworthy or even for things which are blameworthy. 


448 


449 


450 


451 


386 The Passions of the Soul 


This causes the most ignorant and most stupid people to fall into this sort 
of vanity. 


158. The effects of vanity are contrary to those of generosity 

The volition we feel within ourselves always to make good use of our free 
will results, as I have said, in generosity. But any other cause of 
self-esteem, whatever it might be, produces a highly blameworthy vanity, 
which is so different from true generosity that it has quite the opposite 
effects. For all other goods, like intelligence, beauty, riches, honours, etc., 
are commonly esteemed so highly because so few people have them, and 
for the most part their nature is such that they cannot be shared by many 
people. The result is that vain people attempt to humble everyone else: 
being slaves to their desires, they have souls which are constantly agitated 
by hatred, envy, jealousy, or anger. 


159. Humility as a vice 

Abjectness, or humility as a vice, consists chiefly in a feeling of weakness 
or irresolution, together with an incapacity to refrain from actions which 
we know we Shall regret later on, as if we lacked the full use of our free 
will. It involves also the belief that we cannot subsist by ourselves or get 
along without many things whose acquisition depends on others. Thus it 
is directly opposed to generosity, and it often happens that the most 
mean-spirited people are the most arrogant and haughty, just as the most 
generous are the most modest and humble. But whereas those who have a 
strong and generous spirit do not change their mood to suit the 
prosperity or adversity which comes their way, those with a weak and 
abject spirit are guided by chance alone, and are no more elated by 
prosperity than humbled by adversity. Indeed, we often see them 
shamefully abase themselves before those from whom they expect some 
advantage or fear some evil, while at the same time they insolently lord it 
over those from whom they do not expect or fear anything. 


160. The movement of the spirits in these passions 

It is easy to see that vanity and abjectness are not only vices but also 
passions. For their emotion is quite apparent in the demeanour of those 
who are suddenly elated or depressed by some new happening. But it may 
be questioned whether generosity and humility, which are virtues, can 
also be passions. For their movements are less apparent, and it seems that 
virtue is not so closely associated with passion as vice is. Yet I see no 
reason why the same movement of the spirits which serves to strengthen 
a thought which has bad foundations might not also strengthen one that is 
well-founded. And because vanity and generosity consist simply in the 
good opinion we have of ourselves — the only difference being that this 


Part Three 387 


opinion is unjustified in the one case and justified in the other — I think we 
can relate them to one and the same passion. This passion is produced by 
a movement made up of those of wonder, of joy, and of love (self-love as 
much as the love we have for the cause of our self-esteem). On the other 
hand, the movement which produces humility, whether of the virtuous or 
the vicious kind, is made up of those of wonder, of sadness, and of 
self-love mingled with hatred for the faults that give rise to self-contempt. 
And the difference I observe between these movements arises wholly 
from two properties of the movement of wonder: first, that surprise 
makes the movement vigorous from the start; and second, that the 
movement continues uniformly in this way, i.e. the spirits continue to 
move in the brain with the same degree of vigour. Of these properties the 
first is found much more in vanity and abjectness than in generosity and 
humility of the virtuous kind; the second, on the other hand, is more 
prominent in the latter pair than in the former. The reason for this is that 
vice usually proceeds from ignorance, and those with the least knowledge 
of themselves are the most liable to become prouder or humbler than 
they ought. For they are surprised by anything new that comes their way, 
and so they attribute it to themselves and wonder at themselves, and have 
either esteem or contempt for themselves depending on whether they 
judge the novelty to be to their advantage or not. But often one thing that 
makes them proud is followed by another that makes them humble; and 
for this reason their passion involves a variable movement of the spirits. 
On the other hand, there is no incompatibility between generosity and 
humility of the virtuous kind, nor is there anything else which might 
change them; this results in their movements being firm, constant and 
always very similar to each other. But these movements are not due so 
much to surprise, because those who esteem themselves in this way are 
well acquainted with the causes of their self-esteem. It may be said, 
however, that these causes are so marvellous (namely, the power to make 
use of our free will, which causes us to value ourselves, and the infirmities 
of the subject who has this power, which cause us not to esteem ourselves 
too highly) that each time we consider them afresh they are a source of 
new wonder. 


161. How generosity may be acquired 

It should be noted that what we commonly call ‘virtues’ are habits in the 
soul which dispose it to have certain thoughts: though different from the 
thoughts, these habits can produce them and in turn can be produced by 
them. It should also be noted that the thoughts may be produced by the 
soul alone; but it often happens that some movement of the spirits 
strengthens them, and in this case they are both actions of virtue and at 


452 


453 


454 


455 


388 The Passions of the Soul 


the same time passions of the soul. There is, it seems, no virtue so 
dependent on good birth as the virtue which causes us to esteem 
ourselves in accordance with our true value, and it is easy to believe that 
the souls which God puts into our bodies are not all equally noble and 
strong (which is why, following the vernacular, I have called this virtue 
‘generosity’ rather than ‘magnanimity’, a term used in the Schools, where 
this virtue is not well known). It is certain, however, that a good 
upbringing is a great help in correcting defects of birth. Moreover, if we 
occupy ourselves frequently in considering the nature of free will and the 
many advantages which proceed from a firm resolution to make good use 
of it — while also considering, on the other hand, the many vain and 
useless cares which trouble ambitious people — we may arouse the 
passion of generosity in ourselves and then acquire the virtue. Since this 
virtue is, as it were, the key to all the other virtues and a general remedy 
for every disorder of the passions, it seems to me that this consideration 
deserves serious attention. 


162. Veneration 

Veneration or respect is an inclination of the soul not only to have esteem 
for the object that it reveres but also to submit to it with some fear in 
order to try to gain its favour. Accordingly we have veneration only for 
free causes which we judge capable of doing us good or evil, without our 
knowing which they will do. For we have love and devotion rather than 
simple veneration for those causes from which we expect only good, and 
we have hatred for those from which we expect only evil. And if we do 
not judge the cause of this good or evil to be free, we do not submit to it 
in order to try to gain its favour. Thus, when the pagans had veneration 
for woods, springs, or mountains, it was not strictly speaking these dead 
things that they revered, but the divinities which they believed to 
preside over them. The movement of the spirits which produces this 
passion is composed of that which produces wonder and that which 
produces fear (about which I shall speak later). 


163. Scorn 

At the same time, what I call ‘scorn’ is our soul’s inclination to despise a 
free cause in judging it so far beneath us that, although by nature capable 
of doing good or evil, it is incapable of doing either to us. And the 
movement of the spirits which produces scorn is composed of those 
which produce wonder and confidence or boldness. 


164. The function of these two passions 
It is generosity and weakness of spirit or abjectness which determine 
whether these two passions have a good or an evil use. For the more 


Part Three 389 


noble and generous our soul is, the more we are inclined to render to each 
person that which belongs to him; thus, not only do we have a very deep 
humility before God, but also we are not reluctant to render to each 
person all the honour and respect due to him according to his position 
and authority in the world, and we have contempt solely for vices. On the 
other hand, abject and weak spirits are liable to sin by excess, sometimes 
in revering and fearing things which deserve nothing but contempt, and 
sometimes in haughtily scorning things which are most deserving of 
reverence. They often pass very rapidly from extreme impiety to supersti- 
tion, and then from superstition back to impiety, so that there is no vice 
or disorder of the mind of which they are not capable. 


165. Hope and anxiety 

Hope is a disposition of the soul to be convinced that what it desires will 
come about. It is caused by a particular movement of the spirits, 
consisting of the movement of joy mixed with that of desire. And anxiety 
is another disposition of the soul, which convinces it that its desires will 
not be fulfilled. It should be noted that these two passions, although 
opposed, may nevertheless occur together, namely when we think of 
reasons for regarding the fulfilment of the desire as easy, and at the same 
time we think of other reasons which make it seem difficult. 


166. Confidence and despair 

Neither of these passions ever accompanies desire without leaving some 
room for the other. For when hope is so strong that it entirely excludes 
anxiety, its nature changes and it is called ‘confidence’ or ‘assurance’. 
And when we are assured that what we desire will come about, then 
although we still want it to come about we are no longer agitated by the 
passion of desire, which made us await the outcome with concern. All the 
same, when anxiety is so extreme that it leaves no room for hope, it 
changes into despair; and this despair, representing the thing desired as 
impossible, entirely extinguishes desire, which applies only to things that 
are possible. 


167. Jealousy 

Jealousy is a kind of anxiety which is related to our desire to preserve for 
ourselves the possession of some good. It does not result so much from 
the strength of the reasons which make us believe we may lose the good, 
as from the high esteem in which we hold it. This causes us to examine 
the slightest grounds for doubt, and to regard them as very considerable 
reasons. 


456 


459 


458 


459 


460 


390 The Passions of the Soul 


168. In what respect this passion may be proper 

Because we ought to take more care to preserve goods which are very 
great than those which are less great, this passion may be right and 
proper on certain occasions. Thus, for example, a captain defending a 
very important position has the right to be jealous of it, i.e. to examine 
with great care all the ways by which it might be surprised; and a 
virtuous woman is not blamed for being jealous of her honour, i.e. for 
taking care not only to behave well but also to avoid even the slightest 
cause for scandal. 


169. In what respect jealousy is blameworthy 

But we laugh at a miser when he is jealous of his hoard — that is, when he 
gazes fondly at it and wants it always near him for fear of its being stolen 
— for money is not worth the trouble of such safeguarding. And we have 
contempt for a man who is jealous of his wife, because this indicates that 
he does not love her in the right way and that he has a bad opinion of 
himself or of her. I say that he does not love her in the right way, for if he 
truly loved her he would not have any inclination to distrust her. But 
what he loves is not strictly her: it is only the good he imagines to consist 
in his having sole possession of her. And he would have no anxiety about 
the loss of this good if he did not think himself to be unworthy of it, or 
his wife to be unfaithful. Moreover this passion is related only to 
suspicion and distrust, for someone is not properly speaking jealous if he 
tries to avoid an evil about which he rightly feels anxious. 


170. Irresolution 

Irresolution is also a kind of anxiety. Keeping the soul balanced, as it 
were, between several actions open to it, irresolution causes it not to 
perform any of them, and thus gives it time to make a choice before 
committing itself. In this respect, indeed, it has a beneficial function. But 
when it lasts longer than it ought, making us spend in deliberation the 
time required for action, it is extremely bad. | call it a kind of anxiety 
even though we might remain uncertain and irresolute, while feeling no 
anxiety at all, when we can choose between several things which appear 
equally good. But this sort of irresolution proceeds merely from the 
object before us and not from any movement of the spirits. That is why it 
is not a passion, unless it happens that our anxiety of choosing wrongly 
increases our uncertainty. But this anxiety is so common and so strong in 
some people that although they have no need to make a choice and they 
see only one thing to be taken or left, the anxiety often holds them back 
and makes them pause to search in vain for something else. In this case an 
excess of irresolution results from too great a desire to do well and from a 


| Part Three 391 


weakness of the intellect, which contains only a lot of confused notions, 
and none that are clear and distinct. That is why the remedy against such 
excess is to become accustomed to form certain and determinate 
judgements regarding everything that comes before us, and to believe 
that we always do our duty when we do what we judge to be best, even 
though our judgement may perhaps be a very bad one. 


171. Courage and boldness 

Courage, when a passion and not a habit or natural inclination, is a 
certain heat or agitation which disposes the soul to apply itself energeti- 
cally to accomplish the tasks it wants to perform, whatever their nature 
may be. And boldness is a kind of courage which disposes the soul to 
carry out the most dangerous tasks. 


172. Emulation 

Emulation is also a kind of courage, but in another sense. For we may 
regard courage as a genus which divides into as many species as it has 
different objects, and into as many others as it has causes: boldness is a 
species of courage in the first sense, and emulation in the second. The 
latter is nothing but a heat which disposes the soul to undertake tasks in 
which it hopes to be able to succeed because it sees others succeed in 
them. Thus it is a species of courage of which the external cause is an 
example. I say ‘external cause’ because in addition there must always be 
an internal cause which consists in our body’s being so disposed that 
desire and hope have more power to cause a quantity of blood to go to 
the heart than fear or despair have to stop it. 


173. How boldness depends on hope 

For it must be observed that the object of boldness is some difficulty 
which usually results in anxiety or even despair. Thus it is the most 
dangerous and desperate affairs in which we exercise the most boldness 
and courage. It is essential, however, that we should hope for success in 
attaining the goal, or even that we should be assured of it, in order to 
tackle vigorously the difficulties we encounter. But the goal is different 
from the object; for we could not be assured of something and also be 
desperate about it at the same time. Thus, when the Decii threw 
themselves against the enemy and ran to certain death, the object of their 
boldness was the difficulty of preserving their lives during this action, and 
about this difficulty they felt only despair, since they were certain to die. 
But their goal was to inspire their soldiers by their example and to cause 
them to win the victory, and they had some hope of achieving that; or 
else they had a further goal of gaining glory after their death, and of this 
they were assured. 


461 


462 


463 


464 


392 The Passions of the Soul 


174. Timidity and fear 

Timidity is directly opposed to courage. It is a listlessness or coldness 
which prevents the soul from bringing itself to carry out the tasks which 
it would perform if it were free from this passion. And fear or terror, 
which is opposed to boldness, is not only a coldness, but also a 
disturbance and astonishment of the soul which deprives it of the power 
to resist the evils which it thinks lie close at hand. 


175. The function of timidity 

Although I cannot believe that nature has given to mankind any passion 
which is always vicious and has no good or praiseworthy function, I still 
find it very difficult to guess what purpose these two passions might 
serve. It seems to me that timidity has some use only when it frees us 
from making efforts which plausible reasons might move us to make if 
this passion had not been aroused by other, more certain reasons, which 
made us judge the efforts to be useless. Besides freeing the soul from such 
efforts, it is also useful for the body in that it slows the movement of the 
spirits and thereby prevents us from wasting our energy. But usually it is 
very harmful, because it diverts the will from useful actions. And because 
it results simply from our having insufficient hope or desire, we need only 
increase these two passions within us in order to correct it. 


176. The function of fear 

In the case of fear or terror, I do not see that it can ever be praiseworthy 
or useful. It, too, is not a specific passion, but merely an excess of 
timidity, wonder and anxiety — an excess which is always bad, just as 
boldness is an excess of courage which is always good (provided the 
end proposed is good). And because the principal cause of fear is 
surprise, there is no better way to avoid it than to exercise forethought 
and prepare oneself for any eventuality, anxiety about which may cause 
it. 


177. Remorse 

Remorse of conscience is a kind of sadness which results from our 
doubting that something we are doing, or have done, is good. It 
necessarily presupposes doubt. For if we were wholly certain that what 
we are doing is bad, we would refrain from doing it, since the will tends 
only towards objects that have some semblance of goodness. And if we 
were certain that what we have already done was bad, we would feel 
repentance for it, not simply remorse. The function of this passion is to 
make us inquire whether the object of our doubt is good or not, and to 
prevent our doing it another time, as long as we are not certain that it is 


Part Three 393 


good. But because remorse presupposes evil, it would be better never to 
have occasion to feel it; and we may prevent it by the same means as 
those by which we can free ourselves from irresolution. 


178. Derision 

Ridicule or derision is a kind of joy mixed with hatred, which results 
from our perceiving some small evil in a person whom we consider to 
deserve it: we have hatred for the evil, but joy to see it in one who 
deserves it. When this comes upon us unexpectedly, the surprise of 
wonder causes us to burst into laughter, in accordance with what I said 
above about the nature of laughter.'! But the evil must be insignificant. 
For if it is great, we cannot believe that the one who has it deserves it 
unless we have a very bad nature or we bear much hatred towards him. 


179. Why the most imperfect people are usually the most given to 
derision 

Those who have some quite obvious defect (for example, being lame, 

blind in one eye, or hunch-backed) or who have received some public 

insult, are observed to be especially inclined to derision. Desiring to see 

all others as unfortunate as themselves, they are very pleased by the evils 

that befall them, and hold them deserving of these evils. 


180. The function of mockery 

When a person shows up vices in their proper light by making them 
appear ridiculous without laughing at them and without showing any 
hatred for those who have them, he engages in that gentle mockery which 
is not a passion, but rather the trait of a good man. It bears witness to the 
cheerfulness of his temper and the tranquillity of his soul, which are signs 
of virtue; and it often shows the quickness of his mind, in his ability to 
put a pleasant gloss on the objects of his mockery. 


181. The function of laughter in mockery 

It is not improper to laugh when we hear someone else’s mockery; we 
may even find it hard not to laugh. But when we ourselves engage in 
mockery, it is more fitting to refrain from laughing, so as not to seem to 
be surprised by the things we say or to wonder at our wit in thinking 
them up. This makes them all the more surprising to those who hear 
them. 


1 Art. 124, p. 371 above. 


465 


466 


467 


468 


394 The Passions of the Soul 


182. Envy 

What we usually call ‘envy’ is a vice consisting in a natural perversity 
which causes certain people to be annoyed at the good they see coming to 
others. But I am using this word here to signify a passion which is not 
always vicious. Envy, then, in so far as it is a passion, is a kind of sadness 
mingled with hatred, which results from our seeing good coming to those 
we think unworthy of it. Such a thought can be justified only in the case 
of goods due to fortune. For as regards the advantages we possess from 
birth — those of the soul or even of the body — the fact that we received 
them from God before we were capable of doing any evil suffices to make 
us worthy of them. 


183. How envy can be just or unjust 

But sometimes fortune gives advantages to someone who is really 
unworthy of them. Then envy stirs in us only because, having a natural 
love of justice, we are vexed that it is not upheld in the distribution of 
these goods. In this case our envy indicates a zeal which may be 
excusable, especially when the nature of the good we envy in the other 
person is such that in his hands it may be converted into an evil — e.g. if it 
is some duty or office in the exercise of which he may behave badly. 
When we desire the same good for ourselves and we are prevented from 
having it because it belongs to others who are less worthy of it, this 
makes the passion more violent: but it is still excusable, provided the 
hatred it contains relates solely to the bad distribution of the good we 
envy, and not to the people who possess it or distribute it. But few 
people are so just and so generous that they do not bear hatred towards 
those who forestall them in the acquisition of a good which cannot be 
shared by many and which they had desired for themselves, even though 
those who have acquired it are as much, or even more, worthy of it. And 
what is usually most envied is glory. For although its belonging to others 
does not prevent us from aspiring to it ourselves, at the same time that 
makes its acquisition all the more difficult and its value greater. 


184. How it comes about that envious people are apt to have a leaden 
complexion 

There is, moreover, no vice so detrimental to human happiness than that 
of envy. For, apart from the fact that those tainted with it make 
themselves unhappy, they also do everything in their power to spoil the 
pleasure of others. And they usually have a leaden complexion — that is, 
one that is pale, a mixture of yellow and black, like a livid bruise (hence 
the Latin word for envy is livor). This agrees very well with what was 
said ‘above about the movements of the blood in sadness and hatred. For 


Part Three 395 


hatred causes bile — both the yellow bile that comes from the lower part 
of the liver, and the black that comes from the spleen — to spread out 
from the heart through the arteries into all the veins. And sadness causes 
the blood in the veins to become less hot and flow more slowly than usual 
— which is enough to make the colour livid. But because there may be 
several different factors which cause the bile (whether yellow or black) to 
flow in the veins, and envy does not send it there in a sufficiently large 
quantity to change the colour of the complexion unless it is very great 
and of long duration, we must not think that everyone in whom we see 
this colour is inclined to envy. 


185. Pity 

Pity is a kind of sadness mingled with love or with good will towards 
those whom we see suffering some evil which we think they do not 
deserve. Thus it is opposed to envy in view of its object, and opposed to 
derision because the object is considered in a different way. 


186. Those who are most given to pity 
Those who think themselves very weak and prone to the adversities of 
fortune seem to be more inclined to this passion than others, because they 
think of the evil afflicting others as capable of befalling themselves. Thus 
they are moved to pity more by the love they bear towards themselves 
than by the love they have for others. 


187. How the most generous people are touched by this passion 
Nevertheless those who are the most generous and strong-minded, in that 
they fear no evil for themselves and hold themselves to be beyond the 
power of fortune, are not free from compassion when they see the 
infirmities of other men and hear their complaints. For it is a part of 
generosity to have good will towards everyone. But the sadness of this 
pity is not bitter: like that caused by the tragic actions we see represented 
on the stage, it is more external, affecting the senses more than the 
interior of the soul, which yet has the satisfaction of thinking that it is 
doing its duty in feeling compassion for those afflicted. There is also this 
difference, that whereas the ordinary man has compassion for those who 
complain, because he thinks the evils they suffer are very distressing, the 
chief object of the pity of the greatest men is the weakness of those whom 
they see complaining. For they think that no misfortune could be so great 
an evil as the timidity of those who cannot endure it with forbearance. 
And although they hate vices, they do not on that account hate those 
whom they see prone to them: they merely pity them. 


469 


470 


471 


472 


396 The Passions of the Soul 


188. Those who are not touched by pity 

But those who are insensible to pity comprise only evil-minded and 
envious people who naturally hate all mankind, or people who are so 
brutish and so thoroughly blinded by good fortune or rendered 


desperate by bad fortune, that they do not think any evil could possibly 
befall them. 


189. Why this passion moves us to tears 

Moreover, we weep very easily in this passion because love sends a lot of 
blood to the heart and so causes many vapours to flow from the eyes; and 
the coldness of the sadness makes these vapours move more slowly and 
so change into tears, in accordance with what has been said above.! 


190. Self-satisfaction 

The satisfaction of those who steadfastly pursue virtue is a habit of their 
soul which is called ‘tranquillity’ and ‘peace of mind’. But the fresh 
satisfaction we gain when we have just performed an action we think 
good is a passion — a kind of joy which I consider to be the sweetest of all 
joys, because its cause depends only on ourselves. But when this cause is 
not just, i.e. when the actions from which we derive great satisfaction are 
not very important or are even vicious, the satisfaction is absurd and 
serves only to produce a kind of vanity and impertinent arrogance. This 
is noticeable especially in those who believe themselves devout, but are 
merely bigoted and superstitious. These are people who — under the 
pretext of frequently going to church, reciting many prayers, wearing 
their hair short, fasting, and giving alms — think they are absolutely 
perfect and imagine they are such close friends of God that they could not 
do anything to displease him. They suppose that anything their passion 
dictates is a commendable zeal, even though it sometimes dictates the 
greatest crimes that men can commit, such as the betrayal of cities, the 
killing of sovereigns, and the extermination of whole nations for the sole 
reason that the citizens do not accept their opinions. 


191. Repentance 

Repentance is directly opposed to self-satisfaction. It is a kind of sadness, 
which results from our believing that we have done some evil deed; and it 
is very bitter because its cause lies in ourselves alone. But this does not 
prevent its being very useful when the action of which we repent is truly 
evil and we know this for certain, because then our repentance prompts 
us to do better on another occasion. But it often happens that weak- 


1 Art. 128, p. 373 above. 


Part Three 397 


spirited people repent of deeds they have done without knowing for 
certain that they are evil; they are convinced of this simply because they 
fear it is so, and if they had done the opposite, they would repent in the 
same way. This is an imperfection deserving of pity, and the remedies 
against this fault are the same as those which serve to dispel irresolution. 


192. Favour 

Favour is properly speaking a desire to see good come to someone for 
whom we have good will. But here I use ‘favour’ to mean this good will in 
so far as it is aroused in us by some good action of the person towards 
whom we bear it. For we are naturally inclined to love those who do 
deeds we judge good even though we get no benefit from them. Favour in 
this sense is a kind of love, not desire, though it is always accompanied by 
the desire to see good come to the one whom we favour. And it is usually 
joined to pity because the misfortunes we see befall unfortunate persons 
cause us to reflect all the more on their merits. 


193. Gratitude 

Gratitude is also a kind of love aroused in us by some action on the part 
of the person for whom we have it — an action by which, we believe, he 
has done us some good, or at least he had the intention to do so. Thus it 
has the same content as favour, and the more so in that it is based on an 
action which affects us and which we desire to reciprocate. This is why it 
has much more strength, especially in the souls of those who are to any 
degree noble and generous. 


194. Ingratitude 

As to ingratitude, it is not a passion, for nature has not placed in us any 
movement of the spirits which produces it. It is simply a vice directly 
opposed to gratitude, in so far as the latter is always a virtue and one of 
the principal bonds of human society. Accordingly this vice belongs only 
to brutish, foolishly arrogant people who think that all things are their 
due, or to stupid people who never reflect on the benefits they receive. It 
is also found in weak and abject people who, aware of their infirmity and 
need, basely seek the help of others and then, having got it, hate them. 
They do this because, lacking the will to return the favour or despairing 
of their ability to do so, and thinking that everybody is grasping like 
themselves and that no good is ever done without the hope of recom- 
pense, they think they have deceived their benefactors. 


195. Indignation 
Indignation is a kind of hatred or aversion that we naturally have 
towards those who do some evil, whatever it may be. Although often 


473 


474 


475 


476 


477 


398 The Passions of the Soul 


mingled with envy or pity, it has an object that is wholly different. For we 
are indignant only towards those who do good or evil to people who do 
not deserve it. But we are envious of those who receive such a good, and 
we pity those who receive the evil. It is true that to possess a good which 
we do not deserve is in some way to do evil. This may be the reason why 
Aristotle and his followers supposed envy always to be a vice, and thus 
called the envy which is not a vice by the name ‘indignation’.! 


196. Why indignation is sometimes joined to pity, and sometimes to 
derision 

To do evil is also in some way to receive evil. Consequently some people 

join pity to their indignation, and others derision, depending on whether 

they bear good-will or ill-will towards those whom they see committing 

faults. That is why the laughter of Democritus and the tears of Heraclitus 

could proceed from the same cause.? 


197. Indignation is often accompanied by wonder and is not 
incompatible with joy 

Indignation is often accompanied by wonder too. For we usually suppose 
that everything will be done in the way that we judge it ought to be done 
— that is, in the way we consider good. This is why we are surprised, and 
made to wonder, when it happens otherwise. Indignation is also not 
incompatible with joy, though it is more usually joined to sadness. For 
when our indignation concerns an evil deed which cannot harm us, and 
we consider that we would not be willing to do such a thing, this gives us 
some pleasure — which is perhaps one of the causes of the laughter that 
sometimes accompanies this passion.? 


198. The function of indignation 

Finally, indignation is observed much more in those who wish to appear 
virtuous than in those who really are virtuous. For although those who 
love virtue cannot look upon the vices of others without some aversion, 
they do not become incensed except at the greatest and most extraordin- 
ary vices. To be very indignant about trivial matters is to be difficult and 
peevish; it is unjust to be indignant about matters for which no one can 
be blamed; and it is impertinent and absurd not to confine one’s 
indignation to the actions of human beings and to extend it to the works 
of God and nature. This is done by those who, never being content with 


1 Cf. Aristotle, Rhetoric 1, 9, 1386b9; Nicomachean Ethics u, 7, 1108b2. 

2 According to a story well known in later antiquity, Heraclitus wept, whereas Democritus 
laughed, at the follies of mankind. The origin of the story is unknown. 

3 Art. 127, p. 372 above. 


Part Three 399 


their condition or fortune, dare to find fault in the way the universe is 
regulated and in the secrets of Providence. 


199. Anger 

Anger is also a kind of hatred or aversion that we have towards those 
who have done some evil or who have tried to harm not just anyone they 
happen to meet but us in particular. Thus it has the same content as 
indignation, and the more so in that it is based on an action which affects 
us and for which we have a desire to avenge ourselves. For this desire 
nearly always accompanies it, and it is directly opposed to gratitude, as 
indignation is to favour. But it is incomparably more violent than these 
other three passions, because the desire to ward off harmful things and to 
avenge oneself is the most compelling of all desires. It is desire, joined to 
self-love, which makes anger involve as much agitation of the blood as 
courage and boldness can bring about; and hatred causes this agitation to 
affect primarily the bilious blood coming from the spleen and the small 
veins of the liver. This blood enters into the heart and there, because of its 
abundance and the nature of the bile with which it is mingled, it produces 
a heat more extreme and more intense than any that may be produced by 
love or joy. 


200. Why those whom anger causes to flush are less to be feared than 
those whom it causes to grow pale 

The external signs of this passion differ according to different personal 
temperaments and the various other passions composing it or joined to it. 
Thus we see some grow pale or tremble when they become angry, and 
others become flushed or even weep. It is usually thought that the anger 
of those who grow pale is more to be feared than the anger of those who 
become flushed. The reason for this is that when we are unwilling or 
unable to avenge ourselves except through our looks and words, we 
expend all our heat and energy from the moment we are first aroused, 
and this causes us to grow red. Sometimes, moreover, because we cannot 
avenge ourselves in any other way, we have such regret and self-pity that 
we are caused to weep. On the other hand, those who restrain themselves 
and resolve to take a greater vengeance become sad at the thought that 
the action which makes them angry obliges them to take such vengeance; 
and sometimes they also have anxiety about the evils which may ensue 
upon the resolution they have taken. This makes them first turn pale and 
cold, and start trembling. But when they later come to take vengeance, 
they become warm again to the degree that they were cold to begin with, 
just as we observe that fevers which begin with a chill usually become the 
most severe. 


478 


479 


480 


481 


400 The Passions of the Soul 


201. There are two sorts of anger: the most kind-hearted persons are the 
most prone to the first 
This shows us that we can distinguish two kinds of anger. One flares up 
quickly and is quite evident in external behaviour, but it has little effect 
and is easy to assuage. The other is not so apparent at first, but gnaws 
more at one’s heart and has effects that are more dangerous. Those filled 
with kindness and love are more prone to the first; for it does not result 
from a deep hatred but from an instant aversion which surprises them 
because they are inclined to imagine that all things ought to take place in 
the manner they judge to be best, and so they wonder and take offence as 
soon as things turn out otherwise. This often happens even though the 
matter does not affect them personally, because their great affection 
makes them concerned for those they love in the same way as for 
themselves. Thus, what would cause mere indignation in someone else is 
for them a cause of anger; and since their inclination for love fills their 
heart with much heat and blood, the aversion which surprises them must 
drive enough bile into the heart to bring about a great commotion in this 
blood. But this commotion does not last, because the strength of the 
surprise does not continue, and as soon as they perceive that the object of 
their anger ought not to disturb them so much, they repent of their anger. 


202. It is weak and abject souls who most allow themselves to be carried 
away by the second sort of anger 

The other kind of anger, in which hatred and sadness predominate, is not 
sO apparent at first except perhaps in so far as it makes the face grow 
pale. But its strength is gradually increased by the agitation which a 
burning desire for vengeance stirs up in the blood; and the blood, being 
mixed with the bile driven to the heart from the lower part of the liver 
and spleen, produces a very keen and piercing heat there. As it is the most 
generous souls who have the most gratitude, so it is those with the most 
vanity, the most abject and weak, who let themselves most readily be 
carried away by this kind of anger. For the wrongs that arouse our anger 
appear greater in proportion as vanity increases our self-esteem and also 
in proportion to our esteem for the good things which they take away; 
and the weaker and more abject our soul, the greater our esteem for these 
good things, since they depend on others. 


203. Generosity serves as a remedy against the excesses of anger 

Finally, although this passion is useful in giving us the strength to ward 
off such wrongs, there is no passion whose excesses we should take more 
care to avoid. For such excesses confuse our judgement and often make 
us commit misdeeds of which we must afterwards repent. Sometimes 


Part Three 401 


they even prevent us from warding off the wrongs as well as we could if 
we felt less emotion. But just as vanity more than anything else makes 
anger excessive, so I think that generosity is the best remedy that may be 
found against its excesses. For generosity causes us to hold in low esteem 
all the good things which may be taken away, and on the other hand to 
hold in high esteem the liberty and absolute control over ourselves which 
we cease to have when someone else is able to injure us. Thus it causes us 
to have nothing but contempt, or at the most indignation, for the wrongs 
at which others usually take offence. 


204. Pride 

What I here call ‘pride’ is a kind of joy based on the love we have for 
ourselves and resulting from the belief or hope we have of being praised 
by certain other persons. Thus it is different from the internal satisfaction 
which comes from our belief that we have performed some good action. 
For we are sometimes praised for things we do not believe to be good, 
and blamed for those we believe to be better. But both are kinds of 
self-esteem, as well as kinds of joy. For seeing that we are esteemed highly 
by others is a reason for esteeming ourselves. 


205. Shame 

Shame, on the other hand, is a kind of sadness based also on self-love, 
which proceeds from the expectation or fear of being blamed. Besides 
that, it is a kind of modesty or humility and diffidence about oneself. For 
when our self-esteem is so great that we cannot imagine anyone despising 
us, we cannot easily be ashamed. 


206. The function of these two passions 

Pride and shame have the same function, in that they move us to virtue, 
the one through hope and the other through anxiety. It is necessary only 
to instruct our judgement regarding what truly deserves blame or praise 
in order that we should not be ashamed of doing good and not take 
pride in our vices, as many people do. But it is not good to rid one- 
self entirely of these passions, as the Cynics used to do. For although the 
common people are very bad judges, yet because we cannot live without 
them and it is important for us to be an object of their esteem, we should 
often follow their opinions rather than our own regarding the outward 
appearance of our actions. 


207. Impudence 
Impudence or effrontery, which is a kind of contempt for shame and 
often for pride too, is not a passion because there is no specific movement 


482 


483 


484 


485 


402 The Passions of the Soul 


of the spirits which produces it. It is rather a vice opposed to shame and 
also to pride, inasmuch as these are both good, just as ingratitude is 
opposed to gratitude and cruelty to pity. Effrontery results chiefly from 
our frequently being the object of grave insults. When we are young we 
all imagine praise to be a good, and disgrace an evil, of greater practical 
importance than our subsequent experience shows them to be. This 
happens when, after receiving several grave insults, we see ourselves 
utterly stripped of honour and despised by everyone. That is why people 
who assess good and evil solely in terms of bodily comfort become 
insolent: they find that after such insults they enjoy as much of this 
comfort as before, or sometimes even much more of it. For they are then 
free from many constraints to which honour bound them, and if their 
disgrace involves the loss of goods, they find there are always some 
charitable people who will make up their loss. 


208. Disgust 

Disgust is a kind of sadness which results from the same cause as that 
from which joy came previously. For we are so constituted that most of 
the things we enjoy are good for us only for a time, and afterwards 
become disagreeable. This is evident especially in the case of drinking and 
eating, which are beneficial only so long as we have an appetite, and 
harmful when we no longer have one. Because such things then cease to 
be agreeable to our taste, this passion is called ‘disgust’.' 


209. Regret 

Regret is also a kind of sadness. It has a particular bitterness in that it is 
always joined to some despair and to the memory of a pleasure that gave 
us joy. For we regret only the good things which we once enjoyed and 
which are so completely lost that we have no hope of recovering them at 
the time and in the form in which we regret them. 


210. Cheerfulness 

Finally, what I call ‘cheerfulness’ is a kind of joy which has this 
peculiarity: its sweetness is increased by the recollection of the evils we 
have suffered, about which we feel relieved in the same way as when we 
feel ourselves lightened of some heavy burden which we have carried on 
our shoulders for a long time. I cannot see anything very remarkable in 
these three passions, and I have placed them here simply in order to 
follow the order of the enumeration which I made above. But I think this 
enumeration has been useful in showing that we have omitted no 
passions which were worthy of special consideration. 


1 A play on gout (‘taste’) and degout (‘disgust’). 


Part Three 403 


211. A general remedy against the passions 

Now that we are acquainted with all the passions, we have much less 
reason for anxiety about them than we had before. For we see that they 
are all by nature good, and that we have nothing to avoid but their 
misuse or their excess, against which the remedies I have explained 
might be sufficient if each person took enough care to apply them. I have 
included among these remedies the forethought and diligence through 
which we can correct our natural faults by striving to separate within 
ourselves the movements of the blood and spirits from the thoughts to 
which they are usually joined. But I must admit that there are few people 
who have sufficiently prepared themselves in this way for all the 
contingencies of life. Moreover, the objects of the passions produce 
movements in the blood which follow so rapidly from the mere impres- 
sions formed in the brain and the disposition of the organs, without any 
help at all from the soul, that no amount of human wisdom is capable of 
counteracting these movements when we are not adequately prepared to 
do so. Thus many people cannot keep from laughing when they are 
tickled, even though they get no pleasure from it. For the impression of 
joy and surprise, which previously made them laugh for the same reason, 
is awakened in their imagination and causes their lungs to be swollen 
suddenly and involuntarily by blood sent to them from the heart. So too, 
those who are strongly inclined by nature to the emotions of joy, pity, 
fear and anger, cannot prevent themselves from fainting, weeping, or 
trembling, or from having their blood all in turmoil just as if they had 
a fever, when their imagination is strongly affected by the object of 
one of these passions. But there is something we can always do on such 
occasions, which I think I can put forward here as the most general, and 
most readily applicable remedy against all excesses of the passions. When 
we feel our blood agitated in this way, we should take heed, and recollect 
that everything presented to the imagination tends to mislead the soul 
and make the reasons for pursuing the object of its passion appear much 
stronger than they are, and the reasons for not pursuing this object much 
weaker. When the passion urges us to pursue ends whose attainment 
involves some delay, we must refrain from making any immediate 
judgement about them, and distract ourselves by other thoughts until 
time and repose have completely calmed the disturbance in our blood. 
Finally, when it impels us to actions which require an immediate 
decision, the will must devote itself mainly to considering and following 
reasons which are opposed to those presented by the passion, even if they 
appear less strong. For example, when we are unexpectedly attacked by 
an enemy, the situation allows no time for deliberation; and yet, I think, 
those who are accustomed to reflecting upon their actions can always do 


486 


487 


488 


404 The Passions of the Soul 


something in this situation. That is, when they feel themselves in the grip 
of fear they will try to turn their mind from consideration of the danger 
by thinking about the reasons why there is much more security and 
honour in resistance than in flight. On the other hand, when they feel that 
the desire for vengeance and anger is impelling them to run thoughtlessly 
towards their assailants, they will remember to think that it is unwise to 
lose one’s life when it can be saved without dishonour, and that if a 
match is very unequal it is better to beat an honourable retreat or ask 
quarter than stupidly to expose oneself to a certain death. 


212. It is on the passions alone that all the good and evil of this life 
depends 

For the rest, the soul can have pleasures of its own. But the pleasures 
common to it and the body depend entirely on the passions, so that 
persons whom the passions can move most deeply are capable of 
enjoying the sweetest pleasures of this life. It is true that they may also 
experience the most bitterness when they do not know how to put these 
passions to good use and when fortune works against them. But the chief 
use of wisdom lies in its teaching us to be masters of our passions and to 
control them with such skill that the evils which they cause are quite 
bearable, and even become a source of joy. 


THE END 


Index 


abbreviated representations 43 
abjectness 350, 386f, 388f 
absolute things (vs relative things) 21f 
abstract entities 59f 
abstraction 41, 43f, 52, 56, 58, 61, 63, 65, 
67f, 69f 
accident, universal 213 
action(s), and passion(s) 328, 335 
of the soul 335 
ordinary conception of 234 
actions, bodily, joined with thoughts 344f, 


365, 375 
Adam, Ch. and Tannery, P. x, 8 
addition 71, 73 
affection (kind of love) 357, 374, 383, 400 
affections (of things), as objects of 
perception 208f 
affirmation, as mode of 
thought/thinking 298, 296, 307 
air,element 88f, 95 
ordinary 88,219 
alchemy/alchemists 115, 300 
algebra 17,19, 119, 121 
ambition 347 
anaclastic 28f 
anagrams 27 
analogy 29, 42 
analysis, geometrical 119, 121 
in ancient geometry 17 
anatomy/anatomists 107, 314 
ancient philosophy/philosophers 13, 146f, 
181f 
angels, minds of 242 
anger 209, 281, 337, 345, 352, 367, 375; 
399f, goof, 403, 404 
animal spirits 100, 103ff, 138f, 167, 280f, 
316, 330, 331-5 passim, 336, 339-48 
passim, 349, 353, 362, 364—7 passim, 
369, 370, 373, 381, 385-90 passim 
animals, and free will 5 
and reason 112, 140, 348, 376f 
incapable of language 140 
vs human beings 112, 139-41, 180 
vivisection of 317 


anxiety 342, 350f, 352, 353, 359s 379s 
389-92 passim, 401 
appetites, concupiscible vs irascible 352 
natural 108, 209, 216, 280f, 333, 337; 


345 
of the soul (volitions) 346 
appetition 381 
Archytas of Tarentum 18 
Aristotelians see scholastic 
philosophy/philosophers 
Aristotle 41n, 181, 286f, 289, 302n, 319, 
398 
arithmetic r1f,17f, 51, 58, 61f 
arithmeticians 67, 69 
arrogance 396 
artefacts, and natural bodies 288 
arteries 100, 104, 134-7 passim, 319f, 330 
assertion, as mode of willing 204 
assumptions/suppositions (see also 
hypotheses) 4of, 43f, 150 
assurance 351, 389 
astonishment 354, 392 
astrologers 20, 115 
astronomers 43, 152f, 250f 
astronomical reasoning 220 
astronomy 19 
atheist(s) 309 
atoms 183 
impossibility of 231f, 239 
attentiveness, and volition 344, 345 
attraction 358, 359f 
attributes, meaning of ‘attribute’ 211f, 297 
of athing/substance 196 
opposition between 298 
principal 210f 
Ausonius, Decius Magnus 4 
automatons 99, 108, 139, 205, 329 
aversion, as a passion 358, 359, 360, 364, 
365, 372, 376, 397, 399 
as mode of willing 204 
axioms (see also common notions) 209 


Baillet, Adrien 1, 4n, 7, 116n 
beasts see animals 


405 


406 


beautiful (vs ugly) 358 

benefit and harm see good and evil 

Bible, the see Holy Scripture 

bile 395, 399, 400 

Blaeu, P. and J. 7 

blind curiosity 355f 

blind man’s stick, and transmission of 
light 153f, 166, 169f 

blind, man born, and idea of colour 56 

blood, and animal spirits 100, 331, 334; 


341 


andemotions/passions 28of, 342, 345, 


353, 362-76 passim, 391, 394f, 400 
403 

circulation of 136f, 316, 323f, 330 

expansion/rarefaction of 135f, 137f, 
317-19, 342, 372 

flow of 135-9, 316-19, 330 

redness of 323, 368 

blushing 368, 369 


body, the (human), acts upon the soul 328 


and passions 362—76 passim 

and sensations 284 

benefit/utility and harm to 376f 

compared with machine 99—108, 136, 
139, 315f, 329f, 335 

compared with ship 141 

conjoined with mind 224 

distinct from the mind/soul 127, 141, 
184, 195, 196f, 213, 295, 300, 301f, 
314 

doubts about its existence 295, 301f 

fluid vs solid parts of 319-21 

formation of 321-4 


functions of 108, 314-16, 329-35, 346 


growth of 108, 320 

healthy (and passions) 361f 
knowledge of 196 

living vs dead 314f, 329f 


movements of rorf, 105, 108, 139, 234; 


314-16, 329-32, 3426, 344 


nourishment of 107f, 138, 319-21, 331 


parts of 99f, 139, 315, 330 


union with the mind/soul 99, 141, 209, 


213, 224, 279, 299, 303, 328, 339, 
362, 265f, 375f 
unity/indivisibility of 339 


body/bodies, and extension 44, 59-61, 184 


as substance(s) 210f 

attributes of 195 

collision between 94f, 97, 242f, 244 

compared with sponge 225 

contiguous 234—6 

existence of 213, 218, 223 

false hypothesis of their ‘evolution’ 
256—8, 267 


Index 


hard vs fluid 85n, 245f 
heavy vs light 268f 
how bound together 246 
imperceptible 87f, 95, 286f 
indefinitely divisible 129, 202, 239 
luminous 155 
made from the same matter 85, 256 
mixed/composite 89f, 133 
nature/essence of 210f, 224 
perceivable by the senses 4, 87f 
perception of 302f 
power/force of 243f 
rarefaction/condensation of 225f 
substance/corporeality of 219, 225 
terrestrial 187n, 269 
boldness 343, 351, 388, 391f, 399 
brain, the 100—8 passim, 139, 316, 330, 
331 
and passions 342f, 353, 354, 361f 
and soul/mind 106, 164, 172, 279f, 
283, 313 
composition of 107f 
Burman, Frans 178 


categories, Aristotelian 21n 
Catholic Church, condemns Galileo 79 
Descartes’ submission to authority 
of r41f, 291 
causal explanations 255 
cause(s) 34 
and effect(s) 22, 53f, 72 
efficient 202 
final 202, 248 
first 181 
knowledge of 380 
proximate (primary) vs remote 
(accidental) 305 
celestial matter, fluidity of 252 
vortical motion of 253f, 257 
certain knowledge 48 
certainty roff, 14f, 37f, 43, 125, 197, 
289-91 
and the senses 182 
criterion of 127, 207 
moral vs metaphysical/absolute 130, 
289f 
chaos, primeval 91, 132, 257 
cheerfulness 352, 361, 372, 393, 402 
chemists 16 
Christina, Queen 325 
circle, Cartesian 130 
clear and distinct notions/ideas, of 
substances 211 
regarding material things 288f 
truth of 130, 221 


Index 


clear and distinct perception, and avoidance 
oferror 14, 37, 44, 204, 207 
as criterion of truth 127, 130, 184, 203, 
207 
meaning of ‘clear’ perception 207f 
meaning of ‘distinct’ perception 207f 
of common notions 209 
of sensations/thoughts 217 
clear and distinct propositions 37 
Clerselier, Claude 7, 79, 313, 325, 326 
cogito argument (certainty of my own 
existence) 46, 127, 183f, 195, 196, 
221 
cognitive power(s) (vs motive power) 42, 
50 
cold, sensation of 103, 337, 369 
collision, between bodies 93, 94f, 97, 242f, 
244 
colour(s), idea/sensation of 56f, 167, 209, 
218, 304 
nature of 4of, 153, 156, 323 
perception of 4of, 106, 153, 156, 168f, 
216, 218f 
comets, composed from third element 258 
common notions 45, 197, 209, 247, 295, 
304f 
innateness of 304f 
common sense 150, 355 
‘common’ sense, the 41, 105f, 108, 139, 
164, 173, 303, 316 
comparison 57f 
composite entities, vs simple entities 299 
composite natures 32, 46f 
condensation, and circular motion 238 
and rarefaction 255 
conditions/criteria 5 4f, 56 
confidence 35of, 388, 389 
conjecture(s) 12,14, 47 
conjunction (of simple natures) 45f, 47f 
contempt 350, 383f, 389, 401 
Copernicus, Nicolaus 250 
corporeal form 5 
corporeal images, and pure 
understanding/thought 307 
corporeal imagination (see also 
phantasia) 42, 47,58 
corporeal memory 43 
corporeal nature(s) 44 
corporeal thing/substance(s) see 
body/bodies 
counting 62 
courage 342, 343,345,351, 391f, 399 
Crapulli, G. 8 
creation, of anew world 90-2, 132-4 
ot the world (visible universe) 133, 
256-8 


407 


creation/preservation see God, as 
creator/preserver 

cube 68,75 

Cynic(s) 115, 401 

cypher 35f 


data, required for defining/solving 
problem 54f 
de Rives, Jacques 294n, 308n 
de Roy, Henri see Regius, Henricus 
death, cause of 329 
deduction, and enumeration (or 
induction) 37 
as a means of acquiring knowledge 14f, 
16, 25, 33, 48, 5of, 56 
vs experience 12 
vs intuition 14f, 16 
definitions 49, 196 
Democritus 287f, 398 
denial, as mode of thought/thinking 298 
denial/negation, as mode of willing 204, 
307 
derision 351, 368, 393, 395, 398 
derivation, of causes from effects 54 
of things from words 53 
Descartes, critics of 146f, 283, 294, 307N, 
308-11 
death of 325 
dream of (November, 1619) 3f 
education of 11, 112-16 
project/plan of 118, 119, 124-6, 
141-51 passim, 185-8 
residence in Holland 126 
desire, as a passion 350, 352, 353, 356, 
3 58-60, 363, 365, 367, 369, 370, 375; 
376, 378, 379, 380, 385, 389, 391, 
392, 397; 399 
as mode of willing 204 


despair 350f, 389, 391, 402 
devotion 357 
dialectic 16, 37 
dialecticians 12, 36f, 51 
differentia, universal 213 
digestion 108, 138, 314, 363 
dimension(s) 62f, 65 
Diophantus 18 
direct vs indirect method of solution 24, 
70, 72,75 
discernment 33, 35f 
Discourse on the Method 186 
discovery of a wonderful new science 3, 4n 
disgust 352, 402 
distance, as mode of extension 231 
visual perception of 170-5 passim 
distinction, conceptual 214f 
modal 213f, 215 


408 


distinction (contd) 
real 213, 214, 215 
divine revelation 15, 181, 201, 221, 240, 
301 
divisibility, as mode of extended 
substance(s) 209 
of matzer/bodies 91, 129, 202, 231, 
232, 239, 256f, 258 
division 63, 72, 75f 
doubt 46, 182 
as mode of willing 204 
concerning mathematical 
demonstrations 127, 194, 197, 203 
concerning objects of the senses 127; 
182, 193f, 203 
everything to be called into 117f, 125, 
127, 182, 183f, 193, 309 
method of 117, 127 
dream of Descartes (November 1619) 4 
dreaming 104f 
as areason for doubt 127, 130f, 194 
dreams, illusions of 127, 336, 338 
duration 200, 208, 211, 214 
as an attribute 211f 
knowledge/perception of 217 
meaning of ‘duration’ 212 


earth, element 98n, 99 
earth, the, composed from third 
element 258 
motion of 219, 228, 251-3, 269 
shape of 2526 
effects, recognized/deduced from their 
causes 97,134, 150, 249, 255 
effrontery 4o1f 
elements 88f 
of the visible universe 258 
Elizabeth, Princess 190, 313, 325, 327 
Elzevir (publishers) 177 
eminently vs formally 199 
emotions 4, 209, 28of 
as objects of perception 209, 216 
internal (vs passions) 381 
passions defined as 339 
emulation 351, 391 
enumeration (or induction), and 
deduction 37 
and intuition 26, 38 
and knowledge 25ff, 37 
envy 351, 385, 386, 394f, 398 
Epicurus 182 
equality 58, 62 
vs inequality (in the universe) 257 
equations 76 
error(s), arising from false 
suppositions 258 


Index 


as defects/privations 203f 
avoidance of 194, 204, 207, 218 
four causes of 218ff 
nature of 203f 
of reasoning 127 
of the senses 127, 130f, 172—5, 194 
sources of 47, 54, 203—7 passim 
essence and existence 198 
essence/nature, immutability of 297, 301f 
of God 198 
ofathing 297 
of the self 195 
esteem 350, 357f, 383f, 386, 388, 400, 
401 
eternal truths 97, 208f, 221 
ether 47 
ethics 248, 314 
everyday life (vs contemplation of the 
truth) 123, 126,193 
evil see good and evil 
evolution of the world/visible universe, 
false hypothesis of 133, 256—8, 267 
existence, and conceivability 299f 
andessence 198 
as an attribute 211f 
necessary vs contingent 197f, 306 
notion of 196 
of external objects 197 
of oneself, God, body/bodies see self, 
God, body/bodies 
experrence, vs deduction 12, 46, 245,256 
experience 143n 
explanation(s), causal 255, 288 
mechanical 89, 279, 286, 288f 
extended thing/substance 208, 210, 213 
conceptually distinct from 
extension 215f 
conceptually distinct from quantity 226 
existence of 223 
extension 22, 58—62 passim, 195, 209 
and body/bodies 44, 59-61, 184 
and place 5o9f 
and quantity 62, 92, 225-7 
as mode of extended substance(s) 215f 
as nature/essence of body/bodies 92, 
210f, 215, 224, 297 
as principal attribute of corporeal 
substance(s) 210f, 297f 
conceptually distinct from extended 
substance 215f 
indefinite 232 
indefinitely large 202 
modes of 208f, 210f, 216, 297 
of space(s) and of body/bodies 227, 229f 
of the world 232 
eye, structure of 166f 


Index 


eyes, the, expressions of 367f 


facial expressions, and passions 368, 371 
fainting 370f, 403 
faith 15, 221, 300f 
truths of 125 
falsity 53,130 
falsum 195n 
fate/fatality 38o0f 
favour 352, 388, 397 
fear 281, 342, 343,345, 346, 347, 351, 
369, 375, 385, 388, 392, 403, 404 
Ferdinand I], Emperor 116n 
figures, and ideas/imagination 4, 41, 42, 
64, 105f, 304 
figures/shapes, used to represent 
relations/proportions 64f, 68 
fire,element 88f, 95 
fire/flame, heat and light of 83f 
first principles 3, 15, 179-85 passim 
and absolute certainties, 290 
of Descartes’ philosophy 131, 183-5, 
188 
fixed stars 252, 253 
composed of first element 258 
flame/fire, nature of 83f, 133 
fluid bodies, vs hard bodies 85n 
flushing 399 
formally vseminently 199 
forms, of elements/bodies 89, 91 
of reasoning 36 
fortune 379f, 394, 395 
free will (see also will), and animals 5 
and avoidance of error 194 
and self-esteem 384, 386, 387 
French vs Latin 151 
friendship 357 


Galileo Galilei 79, 142n, 250n 
generosity 350, 380, 384f, 386, 387f, 388f, 
395, 400f 
Genesis 5 
geometers 16, 61, 247 
geometrical demonstrations 120, 129 
geometry 11f, 17f, 40, 51, 58, 62f 
object of 12, 247 
Geometry 187 
Gilbert, William 52n 
glory, andenvy 394 
God, activity of 201 
and ‘new world’ 90-3, 96-8, 132 
as asubstance 210 
as creator/preserver 92f, 96-8, 133f, 
194, 200, 221, 240, 242f, 248f, 256, 
267 
as efficient cause of himself 310 


409 


as primary cause of motion 240 
as pure intelligence 5 
authority of 221 
benevolence of 200, 205, 248 
concurrence of 210, 240 
existence of 46, 128, 184, 197—200, 
221, 300, 310 
idea of 129, 197-200, 211, 296, 305f 
immutability of 93, 96, 211, 240, 242, 
243 
incorporeality of 2o0of 
infinitude of z1of 
innateness of idea of 305 
knowledge of 197, 199, 201 
nature/attributes of 199, 200 
necessary existence of 197f, 306 
not a deceiver 130, 184, 203, 207, 221, 
223,255 
omnipotence of 194, 200, 205, 231f, 
248, 256 
our likeness to 384 
perfections of 128f, 197f, 199, 200f, 
240, 306 
proved from essence of (‘ontological’ 
argument) 129, 197f, 296, 306 
proved from existence of oneself 199f 
proved from objective perfection of idea 
of 128, 198f, 296, 306 
purposes/plans of 202, 248 
revelations of 221, 240 
simplicity and unity of 128f, 201 
supposition of deceitful 194, 206 
understanding of 201 
will of 201 
works of 248, 398 
good and evil, and passions 350—5 passim, 
358f, 361f, 376—9 passim, 388, 392, 
404 
knowledge of 347 
good sense (see also reason) 9, 111, 123, 
151, 186 
gratitude 352, 397 
gravitas 234n 
gravity 183, 234, 287 
nature of 268f 


groans 374 


habit, effect of 344, 348 
Haldane, E. S. and Ross, G. R. T. vii, ix, 


177 

Hall, T.S. roon 

happiness 379, 382, 394 

hard bodies, vs fluid bodies 85n 

hardness, sensation of 209, 224, 282 

Harvey, William, on circulation of the 
blood 136f, 316—18, 330f 


410 


hate/hatred 280f, 350, 353, 356, 358, 
359, 363, 364, 366, 369, 370, 371, 
372, 375, 376, 3776, 379, 383, 385, 


387, 393, 394) 395» 397s 399» 400 
health, bodily, and passions 361f 


hearing, sense of 82, 129, 282f 
heart, the, and emotions/passions 28of, 
340, 342, 345, 353, 362-76 passim, 
400 
beating of (pulse) 108, 137, 322, 331, 
363 
formation of 322-4 
heat in 108, 135—8 passim, 316, 318, 
331, 335, 365f, 371, 400 
movement/structure of 134-9, 316—18, 
330f 
heat, consists in motion 83f 
in the heart 108, 13 5—8 passim, 316, 
318, 331, 335, 365f, 371, 400 
of the body 329 
perception of 108 
sensation of 84, 103, 209, 282, 337 
heavens, the, composed from second 
element 258 
fluidity of 291n 
heaviness (see also gravity), sensation 
of 282 
Heraclitus 398 
history 13, 113f 
Holy Ghost 310 
Holy Scripture 295, 300f, 302, 310 
hope 350f, 352, 359, 389, 391, 392, 401 
human beings, and language 140-1 
as composite entities 299 
human beings, vs animals 139-41, 180 
humility 350, 385, 387, 389, 401 
humility (vice) see abjectness 
humours, bodily 319—21 
hunger 280, 281, 337 
Huygens, Constantin 110, 177 
hypotenuse 67f, 69 
hypotheses (see also assumptions) 250f, 


255 
false 256, 257f 


‘T’ see self 
ideas, (mistakenly) taken to resemble 
objects 81f, 165f, 197, 216f 
adventitious (made up) 303f 
as modes of thought/thinking 197, 198f 
corporeal 4rf, 43 
innate 224, 295, 303f, 309 
not similar to corporeal motions 82, 
153, 165f, 167, 216, 304 
sensory 81f, 84, 105ff, 139, 153f 
universal 212f 


Index 


images 82, 106, 154, 165-75 passim, 340, 
341f 
of real vs imaginary things 303 
imagination 106, 316, 381 
as mode/ faculty of knowledge 30, 32, 
39, 42f, 47, 59-61 
and matter 90, 92 
and passions 403 
and perception of distance 170 
and volition 344 
as mode of thought/thinking/ perception 
129, 195, 314, 335-7 
corporeal 42, 47, 58, 105f, 108, 139 
objects of 121, 220 
vs intellect/understanding 4, 42f, 129 
imaginings 336, 338 
imperceptible bodies, existence of 87f, 95, 
286f 
knowledge about 288f 
impressions (in the brain) 40, 106, 353, 
361f 
impudence 4orf 
impulse, as source of composite ideas 47 
Incarnation, the 201, 300 
indefinite (vs infinite) 2o1f 
indifference see will 
indignation 352, 368, 372f, 397—9, 400, 
401 
induction (in standard sense) 27n 
induction (or enumeration) 25ff, 37 
‘inertia’ see motion(s) amd rest, persistence 
of 
infinite, vs indefinite 2o1f 
infinite being 199 
informare 279n 
ingratitude 397 
innate ideas/notions 224, 295, 303f, 304, 
309 
intellect, the (see also understanding), and 
judgement 204 
and the senses 224 
and the will 10, 124, 125, 191, 204f 
as faculty of knowledge 30, 32, 39, 42f 
as faculty/mode of 
thought/thinking 204, 296, 307 
finite vs infinite 204f 
knowledge of 30 
pure 43 
vs the imagination 4, 43, 129 
intentional forms 154, 296, 303 
intuert 13n 
intuition, as a means of acquiring 
knowledge 14f, 16, 20, 26, 28f, 33f, 
48 
clear and distinct 33f 
vs deduction 14f, 16, 37 


Index 


vsenumeration 25, 37, 38 
irresolution 351, 386, 390f, 393, 397 


jaundice, man with 47, 130f. 173 
jealously 350f, 385, 386, 389f 
joy 209, 28of, 337, 349, 351, 352, 3535 
359, 36rf, 363, 364f, 366, 368-81 
passim, 387, 389, 393, 396, 398, 401, 
402 
intellectual 281, 361, 381f 
judgement, and error 45, 204-7 passim 
and the will 204, 347 
concerning things perceivable by the 
senses 218, 220 
nature of 204, 296, 307 
justice, natural love of 394 


knowing subject 32, 39 
knowledge, and action 347 
and comparison 57 
and enumeration (or induction) 25ff 
and imagination 30, 42f 
and intellect/understanding 30 
and passions 347, 353,354, 355: 377s 


379 
and reason 4, 30f, 131 


and sensory/sense-perception 29f 

branches of 50 

faculty of 203 

method of acquiring 16, 48, 120f, 181ff 

modes of 335 

objects of 10, 12f, 32, 39, 120 

of effects though/by causes 97, 134, 
150, 201 

of good and evil 347, 379 

of nature 5,9, 144,151 

of the self, God, Body bodies see self, 
God, body/ bodies 

of things 12, 39f, 50 

principles of 186f 

scientia (vs cognitio) tof, 13, 15, 16, 25, 
28, 32, 33,49, 69 

scope of 31f, 181 


Labyrinth, the 20 
language, and animals 140-1 
and reason 140 
and thought/thinking r4of, 348 
as cause of error 220 
laughter 371-3, 393, 398 
laws of mechanics 139, 286 
laws of nature, as secondary causes of 
motion(s) 240 
established by God 91, 131 
first law (of Descartes’ physics) 93, 240f 
identical with laws of mechanics 139 


4II 


of ‘new’ world 91-7, 132 
second law (of Descartes’ physics) 96, 
24I1f 
third law (of Descartes’ physics) 94, 
2426f 
light, action of 29,155, 161 
consists in motion/action 84, 153-6 
instantaneous transmission of 34, 153 
nature of 133, 152f, 258f 
perception of 4, 108 
quantity of 168 
rays of 155f 
reflection of 156-8 
refraction of 29, 156—64 
sensation/idea of 81f, 154, 167, 209, 
217, 284f, 337 
light of reason (see also natural light) 14, 
16 
limit 44 
line 61f, 68, 73, 76 
listlessness 370, 392 
location, determination of 253 
locus externus/internus 227n 
lodestone (see also magnet) 55 
logic 119, 186 
logical definitions, avoidance of 195f 
Loretto 5 
love 5, 209, 280f, 350, 352, 353, 356-8, 
359, 360, 363, 364, 365f, 369, 370, 
373-83 passim, 387, 395, 396, 397, 
400, 401 
concupiscent vs benevolent 356 
Lully, Raymond 119 
Lycurgus 117n 


machine, idea of 198f 
natural object compared with 288f 
the body compared with 99—108, 136, 
139, 315, 329f, 335 
visible universe compared with 279 
machines, ancient 18 
madmen 172 
magic/magicians 112 
magnanimity 350, 388 
magnet, nature of 49, §2, §7 
magnitude(s) 52, 58, 64, 67f, 70-6 passim 
incommensurable 66 
Mahoney, M.S. 85n 
material things (see also body/bodies) 208 
certainty about 290 
clear and distinct notions regarding 288 
existence of 223 
forms of 285 
mathematical proofs 18f, 247, 290 
mathematics 2, 17ff, 23, 114, 120f, 186 
as mathesis 17ff 


412 


mathematics (contd) 
certainty of 290 
mathesis (universalis) 19f 
matter 85, 87, 89f 
all bodies made from the same 85, 256 
and bodies 247 
and motion 91, 232 
and quality 92, 247 
celestial 232, 252, 253, 269 
divisibility of 91, 231, 232, 239, 258 
existence of 223 
idea of 232 
indefinitely/infinitely divisible 239, 
256f, 287 
kinds of (elements) 258 
mobility of 232 
nature/essence of 224, 232 
of ‘new’ world 90-3, 132 
prime 91,92 
quantity of 231 
subtle 154, 163, 3226 
terrestrial 232, 269f 
variety in (diversity of forms of) 91, 232, 
258 
Maximilian, Duke of Bavaria 116n 
measure 19, 62, 65 
mechanics 19, 20, 186, 314 
as a division of physics 288f 
laws of 139, 286 
medicine 143, 151, 186, 289, 314, 319 
Meditations on First Philosophy 203, 215 
memory 106f, 108, 139, 197N, 207, 316, 
402 
and deduction 15, 25, 37, 38, 43 
anderror 207 
and knowledge 32, 39, 42, 67 
and preconceived opinions 219f 
and volition 343f 
as mode of thought/thinking 216 
and imagination 42, 43 
corporeal 43 
Mersenne, Marin 79, 1o9f, 161n, 177 
metaphysics 186f 
Meteorology 187 
method, Descartes’ 51, 58f, 64, 112, 120— 
2,125 
as following an order 20, 35f 
four rules of Descartes’ 120 
main secret of 21, 65 
of investigating the truth 15-17 
Miller, V.R. and R. P. 244n 
mind, the (see also soul), and brain 280 
as amode of the body 294, 296—300 
passim, 301f 
as asubstance 210, 294f, 296-300 
passim 


Index 


as organic in its actions 295, 302 
as the internal principle of thought 298 
as the subject of thought/thinking 195, 
208 
distinct from the body 127, 128f, 196f, 
213, 195, 300, 301f 
doubts about its existence 295, 301 
knowledge of 196f 
nature of 294-305 passim 
powers of 17, 30, 200, 242, 248 
union with the body 209, 213, 218f, 
220, 224, 281 
miracle(s) 97 
mockery 393 
mode(s), meaning of ‘mode’ 211, 297 
nature of 301 
of extension 208f, 210f, 216, 297 
of knowledge/knowing 30, 335 
of thought/thinking 204, 210f, 216, 
297f 
vs substance(s) 213f, 298-300 
modesty 401 
moral certainty (vs 
metaphysical/absolute) 130, 289f 
moral code 186 
Descartes’ 122-5 
morals/morality 186, 379 
motion(s), Aristotelian definition of 
‘motion’ 49, 93f 
and rest 234,244 
and sensations 153f, 166, 284f 
and shapes 247 
as mode of extended substance(s) 209, 
211 
as mode of extension 216 
as mode of matter 240 
cause(s) of 240 
centrifugal 96f, 241f, 258f 
circular 86f, 96, 236-9, 241f, 256, 258 
composite 236f 
constancy (‘conservation’) of 93, 96, 
240, 242, 243, 256f 
countless go on perpetually 84f 
direction of 83, 96, 157f, 242f, 244, 246 
heat and light consists in 84 
inequalities/variations in 86, 266 
knowledge/perception of 217 
local 34, 49, 94, 195, 216, 217, 233, 
284f 
nature of (‘strict meaning of ‘motion’) 44, 
233f, 252 
of projectiles 241 
of stars 55, 2526 
of the planets 250—4 
ordinary meaning of ‘motion’ 233, 252f 
perpetual 55 


Index 


persistence of (‘inertia’) 240f, 243f 
power/force producing 
motion/rest 216, 243f 
proper 236f, 250 
quantity of 94-6 passim, 240, 242f, 
244, 256t 
rectilinear 96f, 236f, 241f, 243 
striving after 259f 
transfer of 94f, 242f 
vs action (tendency to move) 155 
vs determination to move 157f 
motive power (vs cognitive power(s)) 42, 


43 
mountain (and valley) 297 
movements, bodily 42, ro1f, 105, 108, 


139, 234, 314-16 passim, 341, 3426, 


344 

habitual 344f 

non-voluntary 334f 

voluntary 315, 344f 
multiplication 72, 74, 76 
multitudines 64n 
muscles, movements of 330, 332, 341, 344 
music 19 


native intelligence 42 
natural cig 108, 209, 216, 28of, 333, 
337> 34 
natural light a also light of reason) 10, 
16, 116, 124, 196, 199, 200, 202f, 
207, 221, 248, 300 
natural phenomena, explicable by 
Descartes’ principles 144, 247, 279, 
285f, 290f 
natural power(s) 29, 34 
natural reason 300 
nature 92, 108, 232f, 398 
knowledge of 144,151 
purposes of 202 
nature(s),common 45 
composite 32, 46f 
corporeal/extended 44, 221 
possible vs actual 289 
simple (vs composite) 21-3, 32, 44f, 48f 
spiritual /intellectual (vs corporeal) 32 
true andimmutable 198 
necessary connection/conjunction 45f, 48 
necessary existence (vs contingent) 197f, 
306 
nerves 100-6 passim, 165f, 167, 280—4 
passim, 287, 316, 330f, 333, 335, 
336f, 338, 341-4 passim, 362, 364f 
‘new’ men 99, 134 
‘new’ world 90-8, 132-4 
nothing(ness) 130, 196, 199, 209, 210, 
230f 


413 


notions, see common notions, simple 
notions 
number 61f, 68, 211 
and thing numbered 92, 211, 226 
as mode of thought/thinking 212 
nutrition 107f, 138, 319-21 


Objections and Replies 187,215 
objective perfection 198f, 306 
obscurity/confusion (vs 
clarity/distinctness) 12, 203 
observations, misleading 317 
necessary for knowledge 143f, 148, 188, 
189f, 256, 321 
Olscamp, P. J. 164n 
ontological argument 129, 197f, 306 
optics 19, 28 
Optics 187 
Opuscula Posthuma 7 
oratory 113,114 
order 208, 211 
and measure 19 
of enumeration 27f, 64f 
of knowledge 44 
of method 20f, 28, 35, 64 
vs confusion (in the universe) 257 


pain 167 
and harm to the body 218, 282 
and sadness/ hatred/desire 361f, 376 
judgements concerning 216f 
knowledge/perception of 208, 218 
sensation/idea of 82, 84, roaf, 209, 
282, 283f 
pallor 368, 375, 399 
Pappus 18 
passions 4, 106, 108, 209, 28o0f 
and actions 328 
and bodily states/movements 362-76 
and virtues/vices 386, 387f, 392f, 398, 
oI 
as confused thoughts/perceptions 281, 
339 
as objects of perception 209, 338 
as powers of the soul 352 
benefit/utility and harm of 349, 354, 
376f, 391, 402, 403f 
causes of 339, 342, 343, 345, 346f 
control over 345, 347f 
definition of ‘passions of the soul’ 338f 
effect of 343 
enumeration/order of 349, 350, 352f, 
402 
external signs of 367-76 
faultsin 376f 
function of 349, 376, 377 


414 


passions (contd) 
general vs strict sense of ‘passion’ 336, 
3378 
in dreams 338 
primitive/simple 353, 383 
principal vs specific 352f, 383 
remedy against 381f, 388, 403f 
perception(s), as mode/kind of 
thought/thinking 204, 208, 296, 307, 
335 
as passions of the soul 335 
causes of 335-8 
intellectual 204 
objects of 208, 336f 
regarded as actions of the soul 336 
sensory/sense- see sensory 
awareness/sense-perception 
visual 154, 164, 167-75 
perfection(s), idea of 128 
objective 198f 
of God 128, 197-200 
of man 205 
of the body 376 
perspicacity 33f 
phantasia/ phantasy (see also corporeal 
imagination) 41n, 42 
phantom limb 283f 
philosophers, and poets 4 
philosophy, and science(s) 5n, 114f, 121f 
and theology 300 
as the search for first causes or 
principles 179-81 
benefits of 180f, 186, 192 
compared with a tree 186 
practical vs speculative 142 
rules for correct philosophizing 221 
physics 40, 186, 249 
principles of Descartes’ 142, 145f, 149, 
247, 308 
Picot, Claude 177, 326 
pineal gland 100, 106f, 340-8 passim, 349 
pity 351, 375, 381, 395f, 397, 398, 403 
place 49, 53,234 
and extension 59f 
and space 229 
external 49, 228f 
internal 49, 227 
intrinsic §3 
planets, composed from third element 258 
deviations in the motion of 266 
motion(s) of 250—4, 253f 
Plato 18n, 181 
pleasure, as intellectual joy 381 
pleasure, bodily (see also titillation), and 
benefit to the body 218, 282 
judgements concerning 216f 


Index 


sensations of 103, 209, 282 
plurality of worlds, impossibility of 232 
poetry 114 
poets, and philosophers 4 
position, as mode of extended 
substance(s) 209 
as mode of extension 216 
how determined 228 
perception/knowledge of 169f, 217 
praise and blame, and voluntary 
action 205, 384, 401 
preconceived opinions 117, 120, 122, 185, 
193, 198, 208, 209, 217, 218-25 
passim, 230, 233f, 241, 248 
preordination, divine, and freedom of the 
will 206 
pride 350, 352, 401, 402 
principles, innately known 288 
Principles of Philosophy, divisions of 187 
privation(s), and negation(s) 45 
probable cognition/opinion (vs 
knowledge) 1of 
problems, perfectly vs imperfectly 
understood 50-6 
vs simple propositions 50 
projectiles, motion of 241 
property 213 
proportion(s) 57f, 62, 64, 65, 68, 120f 
proportionals (mean and continued) 23f, 
38, 68, 73,75 
proposition(s), clear and distinct 37 
necessary and contingent 46 
simple 20, 22, 37, 39, 50, 68 
Providence, divine 38o0f, 399 
prudence/imprudence 379 
Ptolemaic model of solar system 250n 
Ptolemy 250 
purposes, of God or nature 202 


qualities, of bodies 89f, 166 
perceived by sight 167 
perceived by the senses 285 
real 94, 285 
tactile 103, 209, 282 
quality, meaning of ‘quality’ 211 
quantity, and body/matter/extension 62f, 
92, 21§, 225-7, 231, 247 
conceptually distinct from extended 
substance 226 
in geometry vs physics 40 
indefinitely divisible 157, 202 
of motion 94-6 passim, 240, 242f, 244, 
256f 


rainbow 168 


Index 


rarefaction, and circular motion 238 
explanation of 225f, 231 
ratio 23 
real qualities 94, 187n 
reason, and animals 140, 348, 376f 
and Descartes’ method 121 
and faith 300 
and knowledge/truth 4, 30f, 36, 117, 
119, 131 
and passions 355, 358 
as good sense 111, 112 
vs the senses 222, 245 
rectangle 74f 
reflection of light 156—8 
refraction of light 29, 156-64 
quantity of (angle of refraction) 161-4 
Regius, Henricus 189n, 293, 307n 
regret 352, 399, 402 
relations 21f, 64, 68 
relative things (vs absolute things) 21f, 38 
remorse 351, 392f 
repentance 351f, 392, 396f 
repulsion 358, 359f 
respect 388 
respiration 138 
rest, and motion 94, 232, 233f, 241, 244 
as mode/quality of bodies/matter 94, 
233, 246 
persistence of (‘inertia’) 240f, 243f 
revelation, divine 15, 181, 201, 221, 240, 
301 
rhetoric, and philosophy 37 
riddles 53,55 
ridicule 393 
root (square, cube, etc.) 68,75 
Rose Croix (Rosicrucians) 2 
rules 71 
of impact 244 


sadness 209, 281, 338, 349, 351, 352, 359, 
361f, 363, 365, 367, 368-79 passim 
381, 387, 392, 394, 395, 396, 398, 
401, 402 
sceptical philosophy 182 
sceptics 125, 127, 309 
scholastic philosophy/philosophers 16, 94, 
95,129, 142, 146f, 182f, 187, 188f, 
225n, 309 
science, likea woman 2 
sciences 3, 9-12, 34, 120 
and philosophy 115, 121f 
false 115 
reform of 117 

Scientia ton 

scom 350, 388f 


415 


self, the, and the soul/mind/thought 127, 
184 
as a distinct substance 213 
creation/preservation of 200 
essence/nature of 127,195 
origin of existence of 199f 
self-esteem/contempt 383f, 385f, 387f, 
400, 401 
self-evident intuition/knowledge, 1 4f, 48 
self-evident matters 195f 
self-knowledge 387 
self-love 387, 395, 399, 401 
self-movement, power of 85 
self-pity 399 
self-satisfaction 351f, 396 
seminal material 321f 
sensations, and passions 339 
and thought/thinking 219, 280, 284 
causes of 223f, 280—5 passim, 330, 333, 
337 
internal vs external 280, 333, 337 
knowledge/perception of 209, 216, 221 
variety in 280 
sense organs 88, 101, 108, 165, 304, 316, 
332f, 337, 340, 353 
senses, the 5, 40, 43, 47, 139 
and passions 349, 363 
and thought/thinking 304 
and understanding/intellect 182 
external 41f, 101-3, 105f, 164-6, 
281-3, 284f, 337, 339, 340 
internal vs external 280, 333, 358 
objects of 121, 220, 279, 337, 345, 349 
reliability/trustworthiness of 127, 182 
withdrawal of the mind from 129, 180 
sensory awareness/sense-perception 81f, 
87f, 102f, rosf, 164-6, 197, 279-85, 
337 340, 341f 
and benefit/harm 224 
and the brain/nerves 280, 283f 
as mode/ faculty of knowledge 30, 32, 
39f, 42 
as mode of perception 204 
as thought/thinking 195 
objects of 47, 216f, 280 
of external objects 4, 40—2, 81f, 87, 
102f, 105-7, 164—6, 216ff, 284f, 290, 
304, 337, 339s 340, 341f 
sensus communis 41n 
series (of things) 21f 
sets (vs magnitudes) 64—6 
sex, differences of, and 
desire/attraction 360 
shame 352, 4o1f 
shape(s), and extension 44, 46, 62, 64 
and motions 247, 286, 288 


416 


shape(s) (contd) 
and sensory/sense-perception 4of, 44 
as mode of extended substance(s) 195, 
209, 210f 
knowledge/perception of 217f 
visual perception of 172 
sighs 375 
sight, sense of 82, 129, 167-75, 283, 341f 
simple entities, vs composite entities 299 
simple notions 196, 208 
simple propositions 20, 22, 37, 39, 50, 68 
vsproblems 50 
simple things/natures 12, 21-3, 32, 43f, 
44f, 48f 
simple/easy matters 20, 33f, 36, 195f 
sin, not willed by God 201 
size, as mode of extended 
substance(s) 208f 
knowledge/perception of 217 
visual perception of 172 
sleep, and dreaming 130f 
and thought/thinking 195 
and waking 104, 108, 194, 283 
perception(s) during 338 
smell(s), knowledge/perception of 108, 
218 
sensation/idea of 209, 333 
sense of 129, 282 
Snell’s Law 161n 
Socrates 46, 53, 181 
soul, the (see also mind), actions vs passions 
of 335, 343 
ambiguity of ‘soul’ 296 
and pineal gland 340, 346 
and the brain 279f, 283f, 333, 338 
apparent conflicts within 345-7 
as mode of the body 303 
as subject of thought/thinking 314, 329, 


335 

distinct from the body 26f, 127, 141, 
195, 314, 339f 

functions of 314f, 335, 240f, 343, 346 

has no parts 346, 352 

has sensory perception(s)/awareness 
164-6, 172, 279f, 314 

internal sensations of 381 

its action on the body 329, 332, 341-5 
passim 

its control over the passions 345-8 

not the source of bodily 
heat/movement 314f, 329 

of animals 14of 

powers of 352 

properties (faculties) of 307 

rational 97, 101f, 107, 134, 141, 294, 
296f, 345f 


Index 


sensitive 345f, 352 

sensitive and/or vegetative 108, 134 

strength/weakness of 347f 

union with the body 99, 141, 279, 295, 

299, 303, 328, 339f, 362, 365f, 375f 

sound(s), nature of 52, 82 

perception of 106, 108, 167 

sensations/ideas of 82, 167, 209, 284f, 


304, 337 
space(s), and body/matter 86f, 92, 129, 
211 
and extension 225 
as internal place(s) 227, 229 
conceptually distinct from corporeal 
substance(s) 228 
distinguished from place 229 
empty 86, 225, 229f 
imaginary 90 
indefinitely extended 129, 232 
no real difference from corporeal 
substance(s) 227f 
Sparta 117 
species 212f 
species (and genus) 22 
Species 154n 
Sphinx, riddle of the 53, 54 
spirits, bodily 319—21 
spleen, the 362, 364, 366, 372, 395, 399, 
400 
squaring the circle 300 
stars 55 
imagined as very small 220 
light from 219 
motion of 252f 
Stoics 281 
studies, general vs particular 10 
substance(s), attributes/qualities of 210, 
294, 297ff 
composite 299 
created 210f 
extended/corporeal 208f, 210f, 215 
intellectual/thinking/incorporeal 127, 
208, 210f, 215 
knowledge of 196, 210, 220 
meaning of ‘substance’ 210 
nature/essence of 210f 
principal attribute of 210f 
real distinction between 213 
the mind as 210f, 294f, 296—300 passim 
vs mode(s) 213f, 298-300 
substantial forms 187n, 285 
subtil 316n 
subtle matter 154, 163, 322f 
subtraction 71, 73 
sun, the, composed of first element 258 
motion of 252f 


Index 417 


raysof 3 
surface(s) 61, 65 
and external place 229 
surprise 353f, 370, 371f, 387, 392, 393, 
400 
sweat 373 
syllogism 36f, 51 
probable 11 
symbols 66f, 69 


tactile qualities 103, 209 
Tantalus 55f 
taste, knowledge/perception of 218 
sense of 282 
taste(s), sensation/idea of 209, 333 
tears 372, 373, 381, 396 
terror 342, 351, 392 
theologians 300 
theology 114 
and philosophy 30o0f 
things, as objects of perception 208 
derived from words 53 
thinking thing/substance 127, 208, 210f, 
213,224 
conceptually distinct from 
thought/thinking 215f 
thirst 280, 281, 333 
thought/thinking, and animals 140 
and innate ideas/notions 303f 
and language 140f 
and sensations 219, 280, 284 
as essence/nature of the 
mind/soul/self 127, 195, 215, 296 
as mode of substance 215f 
as nature of a substance 298 
as principal attribute of incorporeal 
substance 210, 297 
caused by motions in the body 284 
conceptually distinct from thinking 
substance 215f 
confused vs distinct thoughts 281, 286 
faculty/power of 294, 296, 303—5 
passim, 309 
knowledge of 195 
meaning of ‘thought’ 195 
modes/kinds of 204, 210f, 216, 297f, 
314, 335,343 
pure 307 
thoughts joined with bodily 
actions 344f, 365, 375 
tickling sensation (see also titillation) 82, 
84, 106, 167 
time, and passions 3 5o0f 
meaning of ‘time’ 212 
nature of 200 
parts of 200 


passage of 5 
timidity 351, 384, 392, 395 
titillation (see also pleasure, bodily) 103, 
361f, 376 
totum diaphanum 29n 
touch, qualities perceived by 103, 209, 282 
sensations/ideas of 82, 103, 209, 282 
sense of 82, 281f 
tranquillity (of the soul) 382, 393, 396 
transfer, of bodies 233 ff, 252 
of motion(s) 94f, 242f 
transparent body/bodies 29, 153-6, 
161—4, 166f, 168, 333 
trembling 369f, 399, 403 
triangle 46 
idea of 212f 
triangular numbers 64n 
Trinity, the (Holy) 201 
truth, the, method of investigating 16ff 
truth(s), eternal 97, 208f, 221 
indubitable 1of 
self-evident 45, 48f, 50 
truth/falsity 30 
Tycho Brahe 250 


ugly (vs beautiful) 358 
understanding (see also intellect) 42, 54, 
56, 204 
and the senses 182 
as mode of thought/thinking/ 
perception 195, 204, 216 
objects of 220 
pure 204, 307 
vs grasping 199 
vs imagination 220, 303 
vs will 15 
unit 65f, 68,72 
unity 62f 
universal(s), as modes of 
thought/thinking 212f 
vs particular(s) 22 
universe, indefinitely extended 232, 248 


vacuum/void 183, 225, 238 
existence of 85ff 
fear of 87 
impossibility of 229f, 287 
meaning of ‘vacuum’ 230 
nature of 48 
vanity 385f, 387, 396, 400 
veins 134-7 passim, 320, 330, 363, 366 
veneration 350, 388 
vengeance 399, 400, 404 
vice, results from ignorance 387 
virtue(s) r90f, 387 
pursuit of 379, 382, 384, 396 


418 


virtue/vice, and passions 386, 387f, 392f, 
398, 401 
virtuous/good will 384, 395, 397 
vision, sense of 167-75 
Vives, Juan Luis 372 
vivisection 317 
Voet, Gisbert 189n, 293 
volition(s), and appetites 346 
and pineal gland 343-6 passim 
as actions of the soul 335, 339, 343-5 
as mode/kind of though/thinking 204, 
208, 216, 296, 307, 314, 333, 335; 


343 
perceptions of 335 


sorts of 335 
vortex, meaning of ‘vortex’ 257n 
solar 253f 


waking, and sleep 104, 194 
weeping 369, 373-5, 403 


Index 


will, the, and bodily movement 234, 314, 
3355 343-5 
and judgement 204, 347 
and passions 345, 349, 365 
and the intellect/understanding 124, 
125, 204-6 
as a faculty of the mind/soul 204, 296, 
314, 335,343 
freedom of 194, 205f, 343, 379, 384, 
386, 387 
indifference of 206 
modes of 204 
scope of 204f 
self-evidence of its freedom 205f 
strength/weakness of 347f 
wisdom 9, 18, 179, 191f, 384, 404 
levels of 181 
wonder 359, 3§2, 353-6, 362, 371f, 383, 
387, 388, 392, 398 
words, meaning based on convention 81f 
things derived from 53 
thoughts concerned with 220 


